sot 
fon 


os 
witb ane 
py ewes 
ree aia 


THE CASE FOR INCENSE 


SUBMITTED TO HIS GRACE 


nae ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY 


THE REV. H® WESTALL 


ONE MON DAY, MAY, 8) 1899 


TOGETHER WITH 


A LEGAL ARGUMENT 


AND 


See APPENDICES (OF THE—EXPERRS 


LONGUANS, GREEN, AND CO. 
39, PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON, 
NEW YORK AND BOMBAY, 

1899 


( >» 


PRINTED BY 
Dis ChURGE PRINTING COMPANY, 
BURLEIGH STREET, STRAND, 


ib OF CONTENTS: 


PAGE 


GENERAL HisTorRICAL AND THEOLOGICAL STATEMENT I 
OUTLINE OF LEGAL ARGUMENTS... ai Be a 23 
ve P EN DICES— 
A. Notes on THE Earty History oF THE USE 
oF InceNsE. W. H. FRERE wes nee? 


B. On THe Use or INCENSE IN THE ORTHODOX 
EasTERN CuurcH. W. J. BirxBeck ee, 


C. THe THEOLOGICAL VALUE oF INCENSE 


Peto.  ERCIVAL. s.: oe ee eae) 
2 WA STONE  s2, “5 fs ses ree OF, 


D. Tue Rusrics COMPARED AND THEIR EVIDENTIAL 
VALUE CONSIDERED. FE, GELDART ... se OB 


E. Two Cases ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE PERMANENCE 
oF AccusTtomMep Usaces. W. H. FRERE... 137 


F. Tue Use of THE CENSER AFTER THE ACCUS- 
TOMED Manner. 7T. A. Lacey see ee Al 


G. On THE EpwWaRDIAN INVENTORIES OF CHURCH 


. Goopse VV. oF. |, Hore nee ian LAG 
H. Tue Postr-RerormatTion Uses oF INCENSE. 
Wit hBeRE .... a ee Oa ne THF 
J. InceNsE UnpER THE Prayer Book oF 1549. 
eA IOKCEY: ©... vi or ne eek yo 
Pica 


Bot ¢ 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
In 2025 


https://archive.org/details/owb_C0O-AUU-939 - 


ee EAE ie 


OF THE CASE OF 


Mae REV. H.-WESTALE 


ON BEHALF OF 


Me, OS OF INCENSE 


AND 


POC ONAL, LIGHTS. 


ma OlLAd EM ENT 


OF THE CASE OF 


OME KEV. H> WESFALL 


ON BEHALF OF 


The Use of Incense & Processional Lights 


In obedience to the Bishop of London, I submit to your Grace 
the following Statement in justification of two points of cere- 
monial practice observed in my church in the performance of 
the Holy Eucharist and Divine Worship for the last twelve 
years. 

In doing so, I desire to state at the outset, as was done by 
the Bishop of Lincoln when formally cited to appear before 
the late Archbishop of Canterbury in reference to certain points 
of ceremonial observance, (1) that the only authority which I 
can recognize as competent finally to determine and settle such 
matters is the Synod of the Province, and (2) that in thus 
appearing before your Grace I base my conduct, not on a 
particular clause in the Preface of the Prayer Book which I 
believe can be shown to refer to a totally different class of 
matters, but on the obedience due to the inherent authority of 
my Bishop, and to that of your Grace, in so far as your Grace 
represents the authority of the Synod of the Province. 

The ceremonial practices referred by the Bishop of 
London to your Grace are two: the use of Incense as it 
has been accustomed to be used in the Church of England 
from early times, and the carrying of Lights in procession, 
and at other accustomed times in the performance of Divine 


Worship. 
B 


ae 


In regard to the use of Incense, I have to state that 
Incense is burnt in the accustomed manner at processions ; 
during the celebration of Holy Communion, at the Approach 
to the Altar, at the Gospel, at the Offertory, and at the Con- 
secration ; and at Evensong on Festivals at the Magnificat. 

I respectfully submit that the use of Incense in the 
accustomed manner is not contrary to the laws and customs 
ecclesiastical of this Church and Realm, and I humbly crave 
the protection of your Grace and that of the Synod of the 
Province for myself and my people. 


I. The use of Incense in the solemn celebration of Divine 
Worship is universal, and that from very early times, through- 
out the whole Church, East and West alike. 

It had previously formed part of the Temple worship, where 
it was enjoined by Almighty God Himself. The offering of 
Incense was part of the daily morning and evening services in 
the Temple, and also of the ceremonial of the Day of Atone- 
ment. It was included as a regular part of the sacrificial 
system, especially in connexion with the unbloody Sacrifice. 
The censing was among the most solemn privileges of the 
Levitical Priesthood. Other Levitical ceremonies passed 
away, but this, as an accompaniment of the unbloody Sacrifice, 
has been retained and become one of the signs of the Universal 
Christian Church. 

It can claim our Lord’s sanction, not only from His con- 
nexion with the Temple worship, but also from the facts 
(1) that the moment of the offering of Incense by Zachariah 
was chosen as the moment for the opening of the new dispensa- 
tion; (2) that it was among the gifts offered to Himself by the 
Wise Men. 

Further sanction is to be found in the Apocalypse, where it 
is twice mentioned as forming part of heavenly worship, and 
as being ceremonially used. In fact, it is not too much to say 
that on Biblical grounds there is no ceremonial custom so well 
established as the use of Incense in Divine Worship. 


0” 
vo 


The Christian Church has carried on the precedent thus 
set, and has for centuries used Incense as part of Divine 
Worship. The use may not have been continuous, for in the 
earliest days there were many circumstances which militated 
against it and forced the Church to deny herself for the time 
the privilege of this beautiful piece of Biblical symbolism. In 
the days of persecution Christian worship was necessarily 
cramped, and, moreover, such things as savoured of Paganism 
were necessarily abjured; nothing was more crucial in this 
connexion than the burning of Incense, for it soon became the 
test of Paganism versus Christianity. But when the Church 
emerged victorious from the conflict, the burning of Incense 
ceased to be a dangerous seduction of heathenism, Christian 
worship began to claim the external dignity which till then it 
had foregone, and the liturgical use of Incense was one of the 
first evidences of the new state of things which had come 
about. When once it was restored it was steadily taken up, 
and spread till it became universal. And such it has con- 
tinued: it is neither Roman nor Medieval nor Eastern; it has 
won a permanent place in all the great Christian liturgies; 
orthodox and heretic, Eastern and Western, all unite in using 
it as a solemn part of their devotions.! 

In the East Divine worship is never celebrated without 
Incense, and it is one of the reproaches which the East 
makes against the West that it allows the Holy Com- 
munion to becelebrated without an adjunct which the Orthodox 
Church holds to be of Ecumenical obligation; in this con- 
nexion constant reference is made to the Seventh General 
Council, on the ground that the censing of persons and things 
is a witness to the change which the Incarnation has pro- 
duced in the relation of the whole material creation to God. 

The symbolism is transparently clear, and needs no explana- 
tion to any devout and intelligent mind, least of all to one that 
is familiar with the Bible. Various interpretations have at 
times been put forth of the censings in detail, but the broad 


1 For the History of the use of Incense, especially in the Western 
Church, see Appendix A, 


2 See Appendix B. 


4 


reference that underlies all these is to the power of intercessory 
prayer and the mediation of our Blessed Lord.! 


II. In the West, and in England as part of the Western 
Church, Incense has continuously been used at processions ; 
in the solemn celebration of Holy Communion, at the Approach 
to the Altar, the Gospel, and the Offertory; and in honour 
_ of the Incarnation at the singing of the Evangelical Canticles 
Magnificat and Benedictus on Sundays and Festivals?; 
it has only dropped out of general use during these later years 
in England, when the celebration of Holy Communion itself 
on Sundays and Saints’ Days, together with so much else of 
primitive practice and obligation, has been allowed by the 
“negligence of the ecclesiastical authorities to fall to so large 
an extent into abeyance. 

The manner of its use is prescribed in all the old Service 
Books in greater or less detail, nor is there, in any of the later 
Service Books of the Church of England beginning with the 
Order for Communion put out in 1548, and the First English 
Prayer Book put out in 1549, any rubric forbidding its use. 

In regard to Mattins and Evensong it cannot be said, with 
any semblance of truth, that the changes made by the 
Church of England, when those responsible for the spiritual 
government of the Church put out a translation and abridg- 
ment of such of the Breviary Services as were then in 
common parochial use, involve any prohibition of the ac- 
customed use of Incense at the Magnificat and Benedictus. 

In regard to the Holy Communion it cannot be maintained 
that when the same authorities, including men of the old 
learning such as Thirlby, Bishop of Westminster, and Day, 
Bishop of Chichester, put out an Order for ‘“‘ The Supper of the 
Lord and the Holy Communion, commonly calledthe Masse,” in 
English, they forbad and made illegal what for generations had 
been an accustomed adjunct of the service ; in all the changes, 
which they then made, there is no indication of such a prohibi- 
tion ; and failing any express direction to that effect, it cannot 


1 See Appendix C, 


2 As well as on other occasions at the Service of Nocturns. 


5 


be held that such was intended; especially when it is borne in 
mind that these changes were designed to restore the services 
to that model which should be most in harmony with the 
teaching and practice of the ancient fathers and doctors of the 
Church. 


III. Such an opinion, it is most respectfully submitted 
cannot be maintained, and that for the following amongst 
other reasons :— 


(1) The Church of England, throughout all the changes of 
the Reformation period, steadily, and without flinching, has 
declared her intention and wish to retain all that was Catholic 
and primitive, and merely to get rid of what was superstitious, 
or had been abused to superstitious practice. She disclaimed 
any intention of separating herself from the Churches of 
Italy, France, Spain, and Germany; she “‘ doth with reverence 
retain those ceremonies which do neither endamage the Church 
of God nor offend the minds of sober men: and only departed 
from them in those particular points wherein they were fallen 
both from themselves in their ancient integrity, and from the 
Apostolical Churches which were their first founders.” ! 
She repudiated all changes that struck at any ‘laudable 
practice of. . . . the whole Catholick Church of Christ.” ? 


In a Declaration put out by Elizabeth in 1569, and ordered 
to be read in churches, it was denied that any claim was made 
““to change any ancient ceremony of the Church from the 
Forme before received and observed by the Catholick and 
Apostolick Church.” ® 

This principle is not only expressed in a passage here and 
there in the formularies of the Church of England, but pervades 
her entire Prayer Book, Articles, and Canons. It is inter- 
woven into and inseparable from Acts of Parliament, Injunc- 
tions, Royal Proclamations, and the like, and it was reasserted 
emphatically in 1661 by the Bishops, from whose hands the 


1 Canon XXX. 
2 Preface to the Prayer Book. 
3 Burghley State Papers (1542-1570). Ed. S, Haynes (1740), p. 591. 


6 


Church of England received the Prayer Book in its present 
form. In their reply to the Exceptions of the Presbyterian 
Brethren against some passages in the present Liturgy (166r), 
they condemn in every variety of form a ‘‘departure” from 
the ‘custom of the Churches of God,” or, as they otherwise 
express it, a ‘crossing upon the practice of former ages”; 
they intend to “observe that golden rule of the venerable 
Council of Nice, Let ancient customs prevail, till reason 
plainly requires the contrary”; they refuse to ‘divide 
from the Church Catholick” or to “give offence to sober 
Christians by a causeless departure from Catholick 
usage.” 1 

It is not claimed that no alteration of ceremonial took 
place at the Reformation; but that such alterations as were 
made were made on conservative lines, and only in view of 
certain specific and well-defined abuses; and, further, it is 
_ claimed that clear proof of such alteration is to be required 
before any innocent portion of the old ceremonial is held to be 
abrogated. There is no such proof of any abrogation of 
Incense in the Rubrics of the Prayer Book, which are, 
however, very explicit wherever a definite alteration was 
intended.” 

The principle, then, of appeal to Primitive and Catholic 
usage being a fundamental one of the Church of England, I 
submit that the Prayer Book must of necessity be so 
interpreted as to be made to harmonize with, and by no means 
to contradict, that principle. : 

It is not denied that the use of Incense at the celebration 
of the Holy Communion is a custom of the whole Catholic 
and Apostolic Church of Christ, and is in widespread use in 
parts of the Anglican communion outside. the Province of 
Canterbury. 

No one has ventured to say that it is a custom which 
is open to the charge of having ‘“‘ been turned to vanity and 
superstition ” (Preface to Prayer Book). 


' An Accompt. of ali the Proceedings of the Commissioners of both Perswasions, 
&c .. London, 1661. Esp. pp. 31, 42. 
2 See Appendix D. 


i 


Neither is it one involving “a burden which is intolerable’ 
(Preface to Prayer Book). Rather it is one well calculated 
“to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of 
his “duty'to God by” ... . its ... . “signification” 
(Preface to Prayer Book), since there is no symbol throughout 
the whole of the Old and New Testament so often used to 
symbolize the prayers of the Church as that of Incense. As 
such it was not objected to, even by those who, in the six- 
teenth century, found most to complain of in other practices 
and ceremonial customs of the Church. 


(2) It is true that neither the rubrics in the Prayer 
Book of 1549, nor in that of 1559, nor in the existing Book 
of Common Prayer prescribe where Incense is to be used, as 
was done by the rubrics in some of the later forms of the Latin 
Service Books; but in determining the question of what the 
Church of England intended to prescribe or permit, the fact 
of such omission cannot be held to involve a prohibition, unless 
it can be proved that the rubrics of the various editions of the 
Book of Common Prayer either are, or were intended to be, 
in any sense an exhaustive and complete set of directions for 
the performance of Divine Service. 


The rubrics in the Missal and Breviary made no preten- 
sion to such completeness; much was assumed to be a matter 
of general custom or local regulation, for which no special 
directions were given. For example, in the Hereford Missal 
no mention is made of Incense except at the Gospel, and in 
no English Missal are the lights on the Altar prescribed, any 
more than they are in the Prayer Book. But it would be very 
perilous to argue in consequence that Incense was not used 
at the Offertory according to the use of Hereford; or that 
no lights were accustomed to be burnt in England on the Altar 
at Mass. 

The same thing may be asserted of the Prayer Book, only 
to a still greater extent, in view of the fact that the Book of 
Common Prayer was primarily intended for popular use; 
it therefore assumes knowledge on the part of the clergy, 
and largely concerns itself with directions for the behaviour 


8 


of the people; presenting in this respect a marked contrast 
to the Latin books, which, while they contain fuller direc- 
tions for the clergy, are almost silent as to the congrega- 
tion. As a rule traditional usages are taken for granted, and 
slightly, if at all, alluded to, and only such rubrics are full and 
explicit as were concerned with the definite alteration of the 
accustomed use or with arrangements which were novel 
altogether. 

It is notorious that this incompleteness and scantiness of 
rubrical direction was a marked feature of the Prayer Book 
of 1549, and this was also the case in regard to Elizabeth’s 
Prayer Book of 1559. 


(i) For example, the rubrics in the Book of 1549 make no 
mention of the fair linen cloth or of any covering for the Altar. 
The vesture of the priest that ‘‘shal execute the holy 
ministery”’ is referred to shortly as ‘‘ the vesture appoincted 
for that ministracion,’’ which is explained to be ‘‘a white 
albe plain with a vestement or cope.”? It is admitted 
that by the ‘“‘vestment”’ the chasuble is unquestionably 
meant, and that the term is wide enough to cover the use 
of the amice, stole, and other vestments worn by the priest. 
In the same way the ministers who are to help in the minis- 
tration are to wear ‘‘the vestures appointed for their ministery, 
that is to saye, Albes with tunacles.”’ It is nonew order which 
is given, but the existing order which is shortly referred to; 
and that this was what was understood at the time is certain 
from contemporaneous history. 


Hooper, writing to Bullinger on December 27, 1549, says, 
although “the Altars are here [in London] in many churches 
changed into tables” [by order of the Council in defiance of the 
then law of the Church], ‘‘ the public Celebration of the Lord’s 
Supper is very far from the order and institution of our. Lord. 
Although it is administered in. both kinds, yet in some places 


1 See Appendix D. 

2 Bucer, writing from Lambeth, April 26. 1549, speaks of ‘the 
vestments commonly used in the Sacrament of the Eucharist and tke use of 
candles, &c.,” as being retained. (Ovig. Lett. ii. 535.) 


-9 


the Supper is administered three times a day. Where they 
used heretofore to celebrate in the morning the Mass of the 
Apostles, they now have the Communion of the Apostles. 
Where they had the Mass of the Blessed Virgin they now 
have the Communion which they call the Communion of the 
Virgin. Where they had the principal or High Mass they 
now have, as they call it, the High Communion.” [These 
were all sung Masses. Incense would probably have been 
used at the High Mass, and possibly at the others.] ‘‘ They 
sull retain their vestments and the candles before the Altars. 
In the Churches they always chant the hours and other 
hymns relating to the Lord’s Supper, but in our own 
language.” 1 And again, in a letter to Bullinger of March 
27, 1550, Hooper says, ‘‘ It is no small hindrance to our exer- 
tions that the form which our Senate and Parliament as we 
commonly call it has prescribed for the whole realm is so very 
defective and of doubtful construction, and in some respects 
indeed manifestly impious..... I am so much offended 
with that book, and that not without abundant reason, that 
if it be not corrected, I neither can nor will communicate with 
the Church in the administration of the Supper.” ? 

In 1550 the celebration of the Communion Office of the 
English Prayer Book, with the old ceremonial hitherto used in 
the Mass, was continued in St. Paul’s. The Report to the 
Council in October, 1550, the fourth year of Edward VI., in 
regard to ‘the usage of the Communion in Paul’s,” was ‘that 
it was used as the Very Mass.” ? 

Bucer, writing in 1551, says, ‘‘I may add on ceremonies 
that in many of your churches there is still found a studied 
representation of the execrated Mass, in vestures, lights, 
bowings, crossings, washings of the cup, carrying the book 
from left to right, lifting the paten, cup, etc., etc. All these 
should be expressly forbidden.” 4 

It is to be observed here how things definitely prescribed 
by the rubrics of the First Prayer Book, then in use, and 


1 Ovig. Letters, Parker Society, p. 72. 

2 Orig, Letters, p. 79. 

3 Council Book in Strype, Eccl. Mem. II., p. 372 (i. 236). 

4 Dixon's ‘‘ History of the Churchof England” yol. iii., p. 291. 


10 
things not mentioned in the rubrics, are all put on the same 
level. 

In the face of such facts it is impossible to say that Incense 
was not used under the Communion Office of the First Book 
of Edward, or that the action of Bishop Ridley and the 
Council, or the opinions and wishes of Hooper and Bucer, can 
be held to be a true indication of the mind of the Church of 
England, or of what is covered by the very scanty rubrics of 
_ the Prayer Book of 1549. 


(ii.) In regard to the Prayer Book of 1559, one crucial case 
will be sufficient to prove the point. The provision for an 
additional Consecration of the Eucharistic Elements, when 
necessary, was omitted in that Prayer Book, though it had 
been included in the Order of Communion of 1548. | Neverthe- 
less, a priest in Elizabeth’s reign, who pleaded on trial this 
omission in justification of his practice of not reciting the 
words of consecration again over such additional bread and 
wine as might be required, was condemned, with the additional 
censure of having brought forward an entirely unjustifiable 
plea in his defence.? 


The case was heard on Feb. 20, 1573-4, before Queen 
Elizabeth’s High Commissioners. The Commissioners were 
Sandys, Bishop of London; the Lord Chief Justice Catlin ; 
Gabriel Goodman, Dean of Westminster; and others. The 


! Similarly ceremonies not mentioned in Edward’s Ordinal were 
retained in practice. John Burcher, writing to Bullinger, Nov, 21, 1550, 
says, ‘* Hooper claims to be inaugurated only by the imposition of hands ; 
the Bishop (Ridley) contends, on the contrary, that he must submit to Popish 
ceremonies or at least to those agreeing with the Popish doctrine, namely, 
that he must carry the Bible on his shoulders, and put on a white vest- 
ment, and that thus habited and bearing the book he is to turn himself round 
three tumes (Orig, Letter, p, 673), The same to the same, June 8, 1550, 
Hooper ‘could not allow himself with a good conscience to be consecrated 
with the vestments and tonsure of the Papacy, which is not yet abolished in 
the case of Bishops, They allowed the tonsure to be dispensed with, but 
he must put on the white linen robe when he goes to Parliament,” Jdid, 
p. 665. 

2 Grueber, Three Recent Decisions (1875). p 21, from A Parte of a 
Register, pp. 105-111. 


11 


party accused was Robert Johnson, “of late Preacher at 
Northampton.”! One of thecharges laid against him was the 
omitting ‘to repeat the words of Institution”? when in the 
Administration of the Sacrament more wine was required 
than had been previously consecrated. 

Johnson’s defence was as follows, as he himself recorded 
in prison shortly afterwards :—‘‘I answer under protestation 
that at no time in the celebrating of the Communion have 
I omitted any prayer or words of Institution which the 
order of the Book prescribeth, but have used them in as full 
and ample manner as they are appointed; but sometimes 
upon occasion, when wine failed, I sent for more, which I 
delivered to the people with the words appointed in the Book 
to be said at the delivery of the Sacrament, not again repeating 
the words of Institution, partly for that, it being one entire 
action and one Supper, the words of Institution afore spoken 
were sufficient, as I do take it; and partly for that in the Book 
of Common Prayer there is no such order appointed, unto the 
which in this case I do refer myself.’ 

After his reply to the charge of omitting the ring in marriage 
and the cross in baptism, ‘‘Then the Bishop rose up and 
spake: Those last two be but trifles and matters of no weight ; 
but the chiefest is the Consecration of the Sacrament; for, 
in that it had not the word, it was no Sacrament, and so 
the people were mocked.—Robert Johnson: My Lord, I did 
not mock the people, for it was a Sacrament.—Dean of 
Westminster: Saint Augustine saith, ‘Accedat verbum ad 
elementum et fit sacramentum.’ Now you lacked the word, 
therefore it was no Sacrament.—Robert Johnson: I had the 
word.—Bishop of London: How had you the word, when 
you confess that you recited not the Institution ?—Robert 
Johnson: I had recited the Institution afore, and that was 
sufficient.—Dean of Westminster: Yea, for that bread and wine 
that was present, but when you did send for more bread and 
wine you should again have rehearsed the words of Institu- 
tion.— Robert Johnson: The Book appointed no such order. 


1 He has been much confused with another R. Johnson, Archdeacon 
of Leicester. See Dict. Nat, Biog. 


12 


Bishop of London: Yes, Sir, the Book sayeth you shall have 
there sufficient bread and wine, and then the prayer of the 
Institution must be 1ecited. Now forasmuch as you had not 
sufficient, therefore you should have repeated the Institution.— 
Robert Johnson: There is no such caveat nor proviso appointed 
in the Book.—Bishop of London: But that is the meaning of 
the Book.—Robert Johnson: Men may make what meaning 
they list, but I vefer myself to the Book whether tt be so appointed 
ov no.—Dean of W.: You are not forbidden in any place to 
use the repetition.—Johnson: Neither yet am I commanded. 
.... I pray you tell me one thing, whether be the wordes 
of Institution spoken for the bread or for the receivers ?— 
Dean of W.: For both.’’ Robert Johnson was condemned by 
the Court of Commissioners and sent to the Gatehouse, where 
after a short interval he died.1 

This and some other omissions were supplied in 1662, but 
the rubrical directions still remain very incomplete.? 

It is submitted that on this showing alone it is impossible 
to hold that the omission of any rubric in the Prayer Books of 
1549, 1559, and 1662 prescribing the use of Incense, in the 
accustomed manner, at the celebration of Holy Communion, 
and at the Magnijicat and Benedictus on Sundays and Holy 
Days, can be cited as proof that such use is forbidden. 


IV. A careful consideration of the rubrics of the Book of 
Common Prayer will supply indirect but positive proof that 
such use is in fact enjoined by them. The Ornaments Rubric 
prefixed to all the other rubrical directions of the Prayer Book, 
and governing their intention, after prescribing that the 
Chancels shall remain as they have done in times past, and 
Maiuas and Evensong shall be said in the accustomed place (no 
uncertain indication of what was intended by the rubric), goes 
on to direct that ‘‘such ornaments of the Church and of 
the ministers thereof at all times of their ministration shall be 


1 For the acceptance of other traditional usages not specified in the 
rubrics see also the case of Sir Francis Gawdy, and that of Eliza Shipden, 
before the Court of King’s Bench in the reign of James I. 
printed in Appendix E. 

2 See Appendix D 


They are 


13 


retained and be in use as were in this Church of England by 
the authority of Parliament in the second year of the reign of 
King Edward the Sixth.” 


(i) The second year of Edward V1. is fixed as the date which in 
the first place determines what ornaments are to be retained, 
and the ministrations imposed upon the clergy by the Prayer 
Book are fixed upon in the second place, as the limit for deter- 
mining which of those ornaments are to be in use. 

With regard to the disputed interpretation of this rubric I 
cannot do better than quote Mr. Micklethwaite.1 

Reference is made to the authority of Parliament, and it is 
important to bear this in mind ‘‘ because the matter has been 
much obscured by the frequent quotation of other authorities 
whose orders, apart from the question of date, were not con- 
stitutionally binding upon the Church when they were issued, 
and have not been accepted by the Church and lawfully enacted 
afterwards, as, in this matter, the ruling of Parliament has 
been. King Henry VIII. died on the 28th day of January, 
1547, and consequently the first regnal year of his son and 
successor began on 28th January, 1547, and ended on 
27th January, 1548, and his second year on the corresponding 
days in 1548 and 1549. We have therefore to enquire what 
ornaments of the Church and of the Ministers thereof were 
retained and used by authority of Parliament in the year which 
began on 28th January, 1548, and ended on 27th January, 


1549.” 


‘Tt has generally been assumed that the rubric refers to the 
First Prayer Book of Edward VI. But an examination of the 
dates proves that this is not so.2, That Book received the 
authority of Parliament on January 21st, 1549, which is indeed 
just within the second year of the King. But the time when it 
was to come into use is named in the Act itself, which orders 
that it shall be used on the Whitsun Day following (June gth, 


1 The Ornaments of the Rubric, p. 1s (Alcuin Club, 1897). 
2 The mere style of reference proves the same: no Act of Parliament 
ever could have referred to another Act of Parliament in so cumbrous and 


ambiguous a fashion. 


14 


1549), or, if it might be had sooner, then three weeks after a 
copy had been procured. So that, even if the Book could have 
been obtained within the remaining week of the second year, 
which is unlikely, it could not have been used by authority of 
Parliament before the third year of King Edward, and we must 
seek for something earlier. Now, late in 1547 an Act 
(rst Edward VI., cap. 1) had been passed ordering the restora- 
tion of Communion in both kinds. No form was included in 
the Act, but on the 8th of March following a form was put 
forth by proclamation. It is known as the Order of Com- 
munion, and perhaps it may be disputed whether technically 
it has the authority of Parliament. But the Order was 
approved by the Convocation of the Province of Canterbury,' 
and it was considered at the time to receive its Parliamentary 
authority from the Act 31st Henry VIII., cap. 8.” 


“The Order of Communion was to come into use on 
Easter Day, 1548, and it continued until it was superseded by 
the English Book of 1549. It was not an order for the Cele- 
bration, but only for the Communion, and it was to be 
inserted into the old Latin service, which was to go on as 
before ‘without varying of any other rite or ceremony of the 
Mass.’ This at least is evidence of the continuance, all 
through the second year of King Edward, of the old Latin 
Mass and, by consequence, of the ornaments used in that 
service. Asa matter of fact the same ornaments, or at least 
all of them which have been the subject of controversy in late 
times, were also used with the English Service of 1549.” 


But it is not difficult to find the ‘‘ reason why first in 1559 
(so soon afterwards that the supposition of mistake or accident 
is impossible), and again in 1662, it was thought better to 
refer back to the time before the introduction of the English 
Service rather than to that in which it was used.” 

From the moment of the publication of the English Book 
irregular ‘‘ changes began to be made, and as the innovators 


1 It was issued by Royal Proclamation on the * deliberate advice”’ 
‘after long conference together’ of sundry “most grave and well 
learned prelates ”’ (see the Council’s letter in Wilkins’ Concilia, iv. 32). 


. 
¥ 


15 


became stronger ..... they arbitrarily put down the use of 
ornaments even whilst the book ordering them was still in 
force.” In 1559, in prescribing the ancient accustomed orna- 
ments, it was thus far safer to refer to the second year and the 
period before the publication of the English Book than to that 
Book or its date. The rule at least was a definite one; but 
the earlier Bishops of Queen Elizabeth’s time never honestly 
accepted it, and the reign of lawlessness was fitly opened by 
the following passage in a letter from Sandys, afterwards 
Archbishop of York, to Parker, afterwards Archbishop of 
Canterbury. 

Speaking of the provision in the Elizabethan Act of 
Uniformity (sec. 13), he says: ‘‘ The last Book of Service is 
gone through with a proviso to retain the ornaments which 
were used in the first and second year of King Edward VI., 
until it please the Queen to take other order for them: our 
gloss upon this text is that we shall not be forced to use them ; 
but that others in the meantime shall not convey them away, 
but that they may remain for the Queen.’’! 

Here it must be noticed that Sandys does not say second 
year, but jivst and second year, thereby making the reference 
unequivocally to the time of the use of the Latin service. His 
object was to explain away the proviso, and his impudent 
gloss shows that he was not scrupulous as to the means he 
used. If he could have lessened its comprehensiveness by 
transferring the reference from the second year to the Book of 
1549, he would certainly have done so. That he did not 
proves either that at the time of the passing of the Act the 
reference to the date named in it was not to be disputed, or 
that the ornaments used under the First English Book were so 
far the same as those used before it that it was no advantage 
to make any distinction between them. 

In spite of this disregard of the rubric it was enacted again 
in 1662, not blindly or per incuriam, but deliberately in spite of 
Puritan opposition ? and in a modified form designed to obviate 
any possible misconception. 


1 Parker Corr., p. 65 
2 Accompt. of all the proceedings, Kc., pp. 13, 83. 


16 


At that time, though it was supposed that the First Prayer 
Book belonged to the second year and that the Elizabethan rubric 
referred to it, yet it was not understood at any rate by Bishop 
Cosin, who was one of those chiefly concerned in the matter, as 
referring exclusively and solely to the First English Book, for 
he notes that the Ornaments referred to as having the authority 
of Parliament are those covered (a) by the injunctions of 
1547; (b) by the Act which confirmed the First Liturgy of 
_ Edward VI.; and (c) ‘‘ those ornaments of the Church which 
by former laws, not then abrogated, were in use by virtue of 
the Statute 25 Hen. VIII.” 

‘© And for them,’ he adds, ‘‘the Provincial Constitutions 
are to be consulted, such as have not been repealed standing 
then in the second year of King Edward VI., and being still 
in force by virtue of this rubric and Act of Parliament.” 1 

It was no doubt on such grounds as these that Cosin based 
his own use of Incense and his apparent approbation of cere- 
monial censing.? His testimony is first-class evidence as to 
the intention of the Revisers of 1662. So that at both the 
crucial dates there 1s proof that the rubric was held to refer to 
the true second year, and not to the First Prayer Book 
exclusively. 3 


1 Cosin, Works, v., 439. 

* Bene B Lutherus in formula Missae sive communionis quam Witten- 
burgensi ecclesiae anno superioris saeculi vicesimo tertio prescripsit 
“Nec candelas (inquit) nec thurificationem prohibemus, sed nec exigimus: 
esto liberum.” 7b., 232. 

5 In Services additional to the Prayer Book without doubt ceremonies 
and ornaments not provided for by the First English Book were used after 
1559. The Maundy Services and the Coronation Services are cases in 
point. A description is extant of Queen Elizabeth’s Maundy as_per- 
formed at Greenwich, March 19, 1572-3. The use of Holy Water and of 
the Sign of the Cross will be noted. The description is due to the lawyer 
and antiquarian William Lambarde, and it is printed as his in J. Nicholls 
The Progvesses of Queen Elizabeth, i. 327 (London. 1823); ep. also, p. 83 for the 
Maundy in 1559-60, and Add. MS. 5,832 f. 219 for the year 1595. 


“First the hall was prepared with a long table on each side, and forms 
set by them, on the edges of which tables, and under those forms, were laid 
carpets and cushions for her Majesty to kneel when she should wash them. 
There was also another table laid across the upper end of the hall, some- 
what above the footpace for the chaplain to stand at. A little beneath the 


17 


(11) But whether the reference to the second year means 
the second year, or whether it refers to the First Prayer Book, 
is immaterial to the present argument. 


There is no doubt that Incense was used in the accustomed 
manner in the second year of Edward VI. There is no 
reasonable doubt that it was so used under the First Prayer 
Book. There is not a word in Edward VI.’s First Prayer 
Book to the effect that Incense shall not be used as heretofore. 

Had the intention been to prohibit it, there would have been 
a prohibitory rubric, such, for example, as is found in the 
Order for Mattins :— 


“Then shall be said or sung without any Invitatory this Psalm, ‘ Venite 
Exultemus,’ etc., in English.” 


or, such as that occurring in the Communion Office of the 
Prayer Book of 1549, but omitted in 1552 and in all 


midst whereof, and beneath the (said) footpace, a stool and cushion of estate 
was pitched for her Majesty to kneel at during the service time. “his 
done, the holy water basons, alms, and other things being brought into the 
hall, and the chappelan and poor folks having taken the said places, the 
Yeoman of the laundry, armed with a fair towel, and taking a silver 
basin filled with warm water and sweet flowers, washed their feet all 
after one another, and wiped the same with his towel and so making 
a cross a little above the toes, kissed them. After him within a 
ittle while followed the sub-almoner doing likewise, and after him the 
almoner himself also. Then lastly her Majesty came into the hall, 
and after some singing and prayers made, and the Gospel of Christ's 
washing of His disciples’ feet read, thirty-nine ladies and gentlemen 
(for so many were the poor folks, according to the number of the 
years complete of her Majesty’s age) addressed themselves with aprons 
and towels to wait upon her Majesty; and she, kneeling down upon 
the cushions and carpets under the feet of the poor women, first washed 
one foot of every one of them in so many several basins of warm water and 
sweet flowers, brought to her severally by the said ladies and gentlemen, 
then wiped, crossed, and kissed them as the almoner and others had done 
before. When her Majesty had thus gone through the whole number of 
thirty-nine, of which twenty sat on one side of the hall, and nineteen on 
the other, she resorted to the first again and gave to each one certain yards 
of broadcloth, to make a gown, (so passing tothemall), Thirdly, she began 
at the first and gave to each of them a pair of shoes. Fourthly, to each of 
them a wooden platter, wherein was half a side of salmon, as much ling, 


C 


18 


subsequent revisions where the following clear prohibition is 
made :— 


“These words before rehearsed are to be said, turning still to the 
Altar, without any elevation, oy shewing the Sacrament to the 
people.” 


or, again, in the end of the Communion, where we find :— 


“Tt is meet that the bread prepared for the Communion be without all 
manner of print.” 


Sir Robert Phillimore categorically affirms! that Incense 
was used under the First Prayer Book, and if he affirms 
that only its ‘“‘imert use is now legal” it is to be observed 
(1) that the point was not made before him that the 
censer was an ornament within the Ornaments Rubric: 
if it had been, it is to be presumed from his conclusion 


six red herrings and cheat [manchet] loaves of bread. Fifthly, she began 
with the first again, and gave to each of them a white wooden dish with 
claret wine. Sixthly, she received of each waiting lady and gentlewoman 
their towel and apron, and gave to each poor woman one of the same; 
after this the ladies and gentlewomen waited no longer nor served as they 
had done throughout the courses before. But then the treasurer of the 
chamber (Mr. Hennage) came to her Majesty with thirty-nine small white 
purses. wherein were also thirty-nine pence (as they say), after the number 
of years to her Majesty’s said age, and of him she received and distributed 
them severally. Which done, she received of him so many leather purses 
also, each containing twenty shillings, for the redemption of her Majesty’s 
gown, which (as men say) by ancient order she ought to give some of them 
at her pleasure ; but she, to avoid the trouble of suit, which accustomably 
was made for that preferment, had changed that reward into money, to be 
equally divided amongst them all, namely, twenty shillings apiece, and she 
also delivered particularly to the whole company. And so taking her ease 
upon the cushion of state, and hearing the choir a little while, her Majesty 
withdrew herself, and the company departed: for it was by that time the 
sun was setting.” 

After the Stuart Kings the Washing of Feet at the Royal Maundy 
seems not to have been performed by the Sovereign in person, but 
deputed to the Lord Almoner, and as such the Archbishop of York per- 
formed it in the Palace of Whitehall as late as 1731. (Feasey, Ancient Holy 
Week Ceremonial, p. 111.) 


1 See Martin v, Mackonochie. 2, Law Reports (Adm. and Eccl,), p- 15 
anno, 1868, 


19 


about Lights that he would. have pronounced the accus- 
tomed use of the censer lawful; (2) that he produces no 
ecclesiastical authority for any use of Incense other than the 
accustomed use, which is the use as prescribed in the old Service 
Books. Now the use of Incense in the accustomed manner is, 
I submit, not an additional ceremony, but an adjunct to the 
ceremonies prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer.1 
Therefore his negative argument falls, while his positive 
affirmation and argument in favour of Incense stand. 

In any case it is impossible to prove that Incense was 
not used, and in such a matter the larger rather than the 
narrower interpretation is obviously the just one. I submit 
that existing liberty should not be curtailed, in regard to a 
practice which can claim such high authority as the use of 
Incense can claim, in Holy Scripture and elsewhere, by a 
narrower interpretation of the rubrics, when a larger one is 
possible. 


V. Further it is clear that censers are among the ornaments 
covered by the rubric as having the legal authority of Parlia- 
ment in the second year of Edward VI., and they were 
presumably in use under the Prayer Book of 1549. It will be 
said here, perhaps, that censers were called in afterwards, 
and that this proves that their use was not contemplated. The 
fact is not correctly stated; all the church plate, not merely 
censers, was called inin 1552, but this was done with the simple 
object of replenishing the King’s exchequer, and not as an 
ecclesiastical matter.2. It is evident from the inventories of 
the Church goods which were taken prior to their confiscation 


1 See the argument in Appendix F. 

2 The greater number of the censers were confiscated with other plate, 
in accordance with a decree passed by the Privy Council on 31d March, 
1550 [1550-1], 

“that forasmuche as the Kinge’s Majestie had neede presently of 
a masse of mooney, therfore Commissions shulde be addressed 
into all shires of Englande to take into the Kinge’s handes suche 
churche plate as remaigneth, to be emploied unto his Highnes 
use,” (Acts of the Privy Council of England, edited by John Roche 
Dasent. New Series, vol. ili., a.D. 1550-1552, p. 225. London, 
1891.) 


20 


by the Privy Council in 1552-3 that a large number of censers 
were then remaining, not only in cathedral and collegiate 
churches, but also in parish churches throughout the length 
and breadth of England, despite the constant sales of ornaments 
that had been going on since 1547. Thus an analysis of the 
goods found in 1,402 churches, distributed over twelve counties, 
and many of them poorly furnished, shows that censers are 
noted as having been retained in 378, or 27 per cent., while 
they are recorded to have been sold in only 41 cases, or barely 
Supetrcent:: 

In Mary’s reign little was done to supply new censers, but 
these were retained sometimes in use in the early years of 
Elizabeth. Many were later sold or destroyed, but by no proper 
authority ; and there is evidence of some being retained even 
after the period of robbery and destruction.? It would not, in 
itself, follow that because an ornament survived, therefore the 
use of it was justified. But the case is very different if the 
ministration to which it was formerly attached 7s prescribed by 
the Prayer Book, and this is distinctly the case in regard toa 
censer and the purposes for which it was used. There is 
no evidence of any intention to divorce such ministrations from 
the ornaments proper to them, but every evidence of the 
intention to keep them together. 

The Approach to the Altar, the Gospel, the Offertory, and 
the Magnificat are all ministrations prescribed by the Prayer 
Book. They are all ministrations at which a censer and 
Incense were accustomed to be used. 


1 See Appendix G. 


° The Inventory of Church ornaments remaining in Lincolnshire 
churches in 1566 is printed in Peacock’s English Church Furniture (1866). 
Among the ornaments which were not then defaced or confiscated are 
vestments, copes, albs, sacring bells, censers, rochets for the clerk, 
candlesticks, crosses, &c. For censers remaining see pp. 53, 92. 
In other Elizabethan inventories the censers are also included. For 
example :— 

“An inventory of all the churche ornaments remaynynge in 
che vestry of the Churche of Wymondhm. taken by Stephen 
Vardon, Willm. Kett, John Neve, Thoms. Wysemn., churche- 
wardens, the first daye of December Anno Dom. 1564 & comytted 


zal 


Not only on the strength of the rubrics themselves, but 
on the interpretation put on those rubrics by Dr. Lushington, 
in the case of Liddell v. Westerton, a censer is an ornament 
the accustomed use of which is sanctioned by the Book of 
Common Prayer now. 

But the accustomed use of a censer includes the censing of 
persons and things, and, in default of any prohibition and of 
any fresh directions, it must be assumed that the ornament, 
when (as the rubric directs) it is retained and in use, should be 
used in the old way. 


VI. Further, it is possible to point to a long catena of 
evidence that in some form or other Incense and censers have 
been retained and been in use continuously down to the present 
day. The value of sucha catena was recognized in the Lincoln 
Judgment as evidence in favour of Altar Lights.} 


to the custody & charge of John Powle then parisse clarke except 
such ornaments as be layed into the cheast which be then 
accordyngly named as appereth. 

Imprimis. One vestment of redd velvett embrodered with 
imagery of gold layed into the cheast. 

Itm One other like vestmentte,” &c., &c., &c. 


* * ae * * 


Itm One shippe of tyne and censer of latten. 
Visitors Guide to Wymondham. (Robert Forster, 
Church Street, Wymondham, 1853.) 
1559. 28 Nov. Inventory of Poole, Dorset. 
One peare of vestments of satten of Brydges and one cope of 
the same, 
One crosse, one peare of sensers and one shippe of brasse, 
SECC COCO CCG, 
The administracion of the sacraments are decently pre- 
paryd for accordyng to the boke of comon prayer and the 
quene’s maties. injuncions. 
(Hutchins, Hist, of Dorset, i., 58.) 
1560, at Chelmsford, Essex, 
an old shype for franckensence, a latten senser. 
1567-8, at St. Edmunds Sarum, 
a pere of sansars of lattyn were sold this year. 


1 For details see Appendix H. 


22 


The solemn ceremonial offering of Incense at the Eucharist 


on behalf of the Sovereign at the Epiphany is probably the 


most continuous use, though by no means the strongest piece 
of evidence for the purpose of the present argument. Episcopal 
authority may be quoted for the use of Incense and censers in 
Divine worship. In Bishop Andrewes’ chapel the orna- 
ments included ‘a triquertral censer wherein the clerk 
putteth frankincense at the reading of the First Lesson.” It 
is recorded, in regard to a church consecrated at Wolver- 
hampton in 1635—‘‘and so they went into the chancel where 
was Incense burned.” The use of Incense by Bishop Cosin 
links the Church of Charles I.’s time to the Church of the 
Restoration, and is all the more noteworthy because the Bishop 
approved of ceremonial censing. 

In the form for the Consecration of a Church used by Arch- 
bishop Sancroft in 1685, the following passage is found :— 
«‘ When a censer is presented and received they (the chaplains) 
say, While the King sitteth at his table, my spikenard sendeth 
forth the smell thereof. Let my prayer be set forth in Thy 
sight as the Incense.” 

Earlier than this, in Queen Elizabeth’s reign, the provision 
of fire for the offering of Incense on feast days was considered 
to be still a part of the duty of the parish clerk. The accounts 
of Churchwardens give evidence of the purchase of Incense from 
Elizabethan times down to the latter half of the last century. 

The censers and ships for Incense are known to have been 
retained in the chapels of Elizabeth and Charles I., and not only 
there, but they were in use in parish churches as well, for 
otherwise there would be no meaning in such an indenture as 
that entered into between the Mayor of Bodmin and the 
Churchwardens of the Parish Church in 1566, for censers 
and Incense to be in perpetual use. The indenture records 
that ‘“‘This Indenture made at Bodmin the Sunday after 
the feast of St. Michael the Archangel in the eighth year 
of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth. . . . witnesseth that the 

. wardens and their successors wardens, hath taken and 
received into their hands and keeping of the . . . . Mayor and 
of the whole Parish aforesaid to be used and occupied to the 
honour of God in the same church from the day and year afore- 


a es ee ee Ml 


23 


said forthward all such goods and ornaments as followeth.” 
These include a ship of tin, and a censer of latten. Others 
were a lamp before the High Altar, a sacring bell, two Lent 
cloths for the Communion table, vestments—green and white, 
and one whole suit of blue with a vestment and copes for Good 
Friday. 

At Ely the evidence for the use of Incense down to the last 
quarter of the last century is considerable: two lines of proof 
converge to support the statement that the Rev. W. Metcalfe, 
in acting as deacon in the cathedral, used to swing the vessel 
containing the Incense, and that it was given up in the time of 
Dr. Green—1.e., between 1778 and 1780; the details are not 
altogether clear, but at least it is certain that bundles 
of bills for Incense twice a year between 1708 and 1747, 
exist at Ely among the papers in the possession of the Dean 
and Chapter. 

No doubt Incense was used, as in the case of George 
Herbert at Bemerton, for perfuming the church at great 
festivals, or for meeting the Bishop, as at St. Nicholas’, 
Durham, or in processions, as at Coronations. At the Corona- 
tion of George III., after the children of the Chapel Royal, 
in surplices with scarlet mantles over them, came the choir 
of Westminster in surplices, and then side by side the King’s 
Organ Blower in a scarlet coat with a silver-gilt badge on 
his left breast, the King’s Groom of the Vestry in a scarlet 
dress, holding a perfuming pan.! 


1 Parallel to the use of Incense isthe use of other ornaments, which 
equally are not mentioned by the First Prayer Book, or which were used 
in ways other than those specified by that book. The Houselling Cloth 
has been in continuous use at Wimborne down to the present time: it was 
used by Queen Elizabeth on Christmas Day, 1565 (Nicholls’ Progresses, 1., 
199) ; 1t was provided for use in Prince Charles’s Chapel when he went to 
Spain (see the King’s instructions in Collier, ii., p. 726) ; its use has in this 
century been restored in a few churches, and without being questioned. 
Copes are prescribed by the First Prayer Book of Edward VI. only 
in connexion with the celebration of Holy Communion, but at West- 
minster in the time of Archbishop Williams they were worn by the singing- 
men. At the Zz Deum, followed by Evensong, in King’s College, Cam- 
bridge, at which Queen Elizabeth assisted in 1564, the Provost and Com- 
pany of that House (College) were all vested in copes (Nicholls’ Progresses, 


24 


There is a constant and continuous witness to such use, * 
it grows continually by fresh research, and its value has 
not yet been fully appreciated. In the first place 
it shows that Incense was not held to be forbidden. 
Secondly, the fact that it was so used, and not always 
in the traditional way, merely shows that the traditional 
use had, in some places, been forgotten; it does not show that 
it had ever been forbidden, and still less does it authorize the 
irregular uses of incense which were adopted in ignorance of 
the true traditional use. 


VI. If, somewhat to shift the ground, it be said that the 
disuse of Incense in the traditional manner is the best proof that 
such disuse was intended by the changes made in the 16th 
Century, it may be replied (1) that, in view of the history of the 
Church of England, such an argument is worthless ; (2) that, 
even if it be admitted, it proves too much. The Vestments are 
distinctly prescribed by the rubric; much less evidence, however, 
can be adduced for the use of the chasuble than for that of 
Incense. 


It has shared the fate of much else that was distinctly 
prescribed or implicitly covered by the rubrics, or that was of 
traditional observance in the Church. After lingering on 
here and there up to the end of the sixteenth century, and 


i., 163). Numerous other examples might be given. If the Bishop's pas- 
toral staff may be ceremonially used in the accustomed manner, let it be 
remembered that the use of Incense stands on exactly the same ground 
The authority for the crosses borne before the Archbishops of Canterbury 
and York, and for Bishops’ mitres, is equally good for censers ; for it is 
to be noted that the latter have no authorization unless the ornaments 
rubric legalizes ornaments beyond those expressly mentioned in the First 
Prayer Book. The verge of the vergers is not mentioned in the Prayer 
Book; and the ceremonial observances used by vergers especially in 
cathedrals, ¢.g., in escorting the reader to the lectern or the preacher to 
the pulpit, rests upon no authority but that of custom: the idea which 
underlies it is that of doing honour to the person escorted, and this is also 
part of the idea which underlies the censing of persons, though in this 
case there is further a devotional aspect to recommend and justify the 
practice. 
1 See Appendix H, 


25 


recovering somewhat of its right place during the Caroline 
revival, the use of Incense well nigh totally disappeared under 
the influx of Puritanism, which overspread the Church in 
Elizabeth’s reign, and all but destroyed it during the reign 
of Charles I. and the Commonwealth; hence it survived into 
the Restoration era and the dreary Georgian period only in a 
sporadic and unauthorised manner. As the result of this 
history a Puritan evasion of the rubrics in regard to this 
and similar matters has become general, and, regardless of 
the verdict which with no uncertain voice history has passed 
about such matters again and again during the past half century, 
those of the clergy and laity who honestly seek to revive the 
accustomed and prescribed ceremonial of the Church of 
England are once again denounced as disloyal and lawbreakers. 

I appeal to your grace not only on behalf of myself and my 
people but also on behalf of all loyal and conscientious church- 
men to see that justice is done to us in this matter. 


VII. To pass from the consideration of the enactments of 
the Church to those of the State, it is not without significance 
that among the Injunctions of Edward VI. (granting for the 
sake of argument that these have parliamentary authority) 
there is one which involved a prohibition of the censing of 
images, but forbad no other kind of censing.! The value of 
this argument will be seen from the analogous injunction 
concerning Lights to be burnt before images. In regard to 
Lights, the Injunctions put out in Henry VIII.’s reign had 


1 This follows upon the line of Henry VIII.’s ‘‘ Articles to stablish 
Christian quietness” of 1536. See C, Lloyd’s Formularies of Faith, p. 
xxvill, (Oxford, 1825). Censing is not there mentioned among the general 
‘s Rites and Ceremonies,” but only in this connexion by the way. It is 
not mentioned in the later Book of Ceremonies (printed by Collier, Hist., 
Pt. II., Book iii., 191-198) among the ‘‘Ceremonies used in the Mass.”’ 
This to a certain extent follows the line of the “ Articles,” but it aims 
more at explaining the rite than the ceremonies of the Mass; and those 
ceremonies of which it treats are the exceptional ones of Candlemas, Holy 
Week, and the like, rather than the unchanging ceremonial of the Mass. 
This omission of all reference to censing at the Mass is an interesting 
commentary on the similar absence of all reference to it in the Rubrics of 
the Book of Common Prayer, 


26 


limited such lights to “the light that commonly goeth across 
the church by the rood loft, the light before the Sacrament of the 
Altar and the light about the Sepulchre.”! The Injunc- 
tions put out by Edward VI., which shortly preceded the 
Order for Communion in both kinds, still further limit 
those lights by confining them to the ‘two lights upon the 
High Altar before the Sacrament” to signify ‘that Christ is 
the very true Light of the world.” 2 No further limitation, 
however, is imposed on the use of Incense bevond what already 
existed. On the contrary, it was subsequently expressly 
declared in the Order of Communion above referred to, that 
none of the ceremonies usual at Mass were to be varied. 
The Injunctions, therefore, did not prohibit the use of Incense 
in the accustomed way at the services, and there is nothing 
else in the way of legal enactment, with the exception of the 
Act of Uniformity legalising the Prayer Book, which can be 
supposed even indirectly to touch on the subject. 

The Council during Edward’s reign, and individual Bishops 
constantly interfered with the manner of performing Divine 
Service and the ornaments of the Church and Minister. 
Bishop Ridley’s breaking down the Altars in the Diocese of 
London, while the First Prayer Book was in legal use, is a case 
in point, but even here there is no sign of any interference with 
the use of Incense,® no doubt because on Scriptural grounds 
no objection could be raised to it; and if there were, such 
action was outside the exercise of any proper ecclesiastical or 
legal authority, and cannot be cited as evidence of what the 
Church of England as such allowed or forbad. 


VIII. In addition to the historical and legal argument, I 
am anxious to bring forward certain considerations which, 
though they have not, in the eyes of the historian or lawyer, 
the same formal value as the foregoing, have yet, I submit, an 
important bearing on the case. In any question with regard 
to external observances in Divine worship it is important. to 


1 Crumwell’s Injunctions of 1538, § 7. Gee and Hardy, Documents. 
P. 277. 


* Edwardine Injunctions, § 3. Cardwell, Doc, Annals, i., 7. 
3 See Appendix J. ; 


ee 


27 


consider their practical value to the devout and instructed wor- 
shipper. Observances which are historically and legally 
unexceptionable may yet be unedifying ; and therefore, though 
my main argument is on the question of legality, and not of 
expediency, I am anxious to point out that the use of incense 
is not merely legal but also edifying. Asa piece of symbolism 
it stands less in need of defence than any symbolical usage of 
the Church. In many cases the symbolical value of a thing is 
only an afterthought, grafted on to it after it has on other 
grounds come into use: this is no less true of the ordinary 
symbolism of everyday manners and customs than of Christian 
services. But incense has for thousands of years been employed 
in the worship of God, and always from the first with the same 
symbolical meaning attached to it. It has an import familiar 
to every reader of the Bible, and not open to any danger of 
misconception. Its value is best estimated by the universality 
of its use throughout all branches of Christendom, and by 
the place which it has won in the hearts of Anglican Church- 
men in those churches where during the last forty years its 
use has been revived, both in England and elsewhere. 


IX. On a review of the whole case I respectfully submit 
that there is nothing to show that the Church of England by 
the changes for which she was responsible in the Sixteenth 
Century, intended to prohibit the use of Incense in the 
accustomed manner in the performance of Divine worship, or 
did so prohibit it. 

That, though it may not be possible to prove the fact of its 
use under the Prayer Book of 1549, there is every reason to 
believe that it was so used. That it certainly was so used in 
the second year of Edward, to which on any strict construc- 
tion of the rubrics the reference is made. ‘That there is 
continuous witness down to the reign of George the Third, 
if not later, that English Divines did not believe its use to be 
forbidden, even if it cannot be denied that they sometimes 
used it, not in the accustomed manner, but in some way for 
which no authority can be cited, and which cannot be legally 
justified. ; 

That if in any case there be a doubt as to what is covered 


28 


by the rubrics, such doubt ought and must be determined, in 
accordance with one of the fundamental principles of the 
Church of England, by a reference to what is the practice 
of the whole Catholic Church; that loyalty to the Church of 
England makes it impossible to argue as to what is enjoined 
by or permitted under the rubrics of the Book of Common 
Prayer on such propositions as the following :—‘‘ By necessary 
implication a rubric must be construed as abolishing what it 
does not retain.” ~All acts not prescribed... . to be 
taken as forbidden”; that in a case like the present no 
narrow provincial or insular discussion of the question can 
be satisfactory in view of the sanction given to the use of 
Incense in the Old and New Testaments, and by the practice 
of the whole Church from early times. 

That the symbolism of Incense is at once Biblical, 
luminous and edifying, incapable of misunderstanding and 
naturally congenial to a devout and unprejudiced Chris- 
tian mind; and that for these and other similar reasons 
it cannot be held that any ecclesiastical offence has been 
committed by using and permitting the use of Incense 
according to the accustomed manner in the Church of 
St. Cuthbert; and I therefore pray the protection of the 
Archbishop, both for myself and my people. 


Be 


In regard to the use of Lights in procession I have not 
much to add. It is clear that a large part of what has been 
urged already with regard to Incense is applicable here also 
mutatis mutandis. There is no question that they were in use in 
the second year of Edward VI., and this use can be traced 
back unchanged to the earliest date at which it is possible to get 
any full information as to the ceremonial of the Western Church. 
The candlesticks equally with the censer are ornaments covered 
by the Ornaments Rubric. The Edwardine Injunctions, while 


Miotis: 


29 


they abolished certain stationary Lights, did not touch the 
accustomed use of portable Lights; so that even supposing 
for the moment that these Injunctions had parliamentary 
authority and so had a bearing on the rubric, the argument for 
Processional Lights is not affected thereby. It has already been 
argued that the use of Incense is not an additional ceremony, 
and the same argument applies with even greater force to the 
Lights, which are merely carried. 


In view of the long disuse, I do not ask for any pro- 
nouncement which should enforce the use of Incense or 
Processional Lights on others, or seem to blame them for not 
using them; but I would ask for a statement to the effect 
that I am breaking no law of the Church, by such use of Incense 
and Lights as prevails in St. Cuthbert’s Church, and has for 
years been appreciated by my people. I would add that as 
long as perfectly distinct and definite rubrics are not en- 
forced, and practices contrary to the custom and rule of the 
whole Church, such, for example, as Evening Communions, 
are allowed, it would be a gross violation of justice to attempt 
to enforce a disputed interpretation of the rubrics on one section 
of the Church, and this more especially in view of the fact that 
the agitation against the practices in question is due to the 
action of those who egregiously disregard Church law them- 
selves. 

I subjoin a legal argument and several appendices, and, 
while bowing with all respect to your Grace’s authority, I must 
conclude by urging once more that the Synod of the Province, 
which determined the rubrics in the first instance, is the only 
power which can finally and conclusively determine beyond all 
controversy, whether the use of Incense in the old accustomed 
manner, and in accordance with the use of the whole Church, 
is, or is not, to be permitted in this Church of England. 


31 


OUTLINE OF LEGAL ARGUMENTS. 


The use of Incense as an accompaniment of worship is of 
great antiquity, and common to many religions other than the 
Jewish and Christian religions—e.g., those of the Egyptians, 
Assyrians, Buddhists, and Hindus.) Its use, it is submitted, 
in Divine worship is in entire accordance with Holy Scrip- 
ture,? and, indeed, it would be difficult to name any adjunct of 
worship for which more direct authority can be found in the 
Bible. 

The purpose of its use appears to have been twofold—(r) 
for fumigation and sanitary reasons (probably the earliest use), 
whence it came to signify the purification of persons and 
things engaged or used in worship; (2) as an offering to God, 
and in the Jewish and Christian Churches specially symbolising 
prayer, or perhaps, in Christian times more particularly, the 
intercession of Christ which makes prayer acceptable. It is 
submitted that its use for both these purposes is lawful 
in the Church of England under the Ornaments Rubric, 
and that censers (implying necessarily the use of incense) were 
“retained and in use . . . . in this Church of England 
by the authority of Parliament in the second year of the reign 
of King Edward VI.” 

Prima facie, the words ‘‘second year” would seem to refer 
to the things in use in the second regnal year of Edward, 
which ended on the 27th January, 1549, and although it was 
decided in Westerton v. Liddell that the ornaments referred 


1 See Article in the ‘‘ Encyclopedia Britannica,”’ title, ‘ Incense,” 
2 See, for example, Exodus xxx., verses 7 and 8; Numbers xvi., 
verses 46-48; Malachii., verse 11 ; Revelation viil., verses 3 and 4. 


32 


to were the ornaments retained and in use under the First 
Prayer Book, and the Act 2 and 3 Ed. vi., c. 1, which gave 
that book legal effect, it is to be noted that when that case 
was decided it had not been pointed out,! as it since has 
been, that the Act, although it passed both Houses in the 
second year, did not receive the Royal assent, and so become 
law, until the third year of Edward, viz., on the 14th March, 
1549, it being provided by the Act itself that the Book should 
come into use on Whitsun Day, which that year fell on the 
gth June, or if it might be had sooner, three weeks after 
a copy had been procured.2 Now it is submitted that there 
can be no doubt that censers and incense had been in use 
in the Church of England down, at all events, to the 
end of the second regnal year of Edward VI., as they had 
been before he came to the throne; tor the only alteration 
which had been made on this head ® was that made by Item 3 
of the Injunctions of Edward VI., which ordered the removal of 
such images as were known ‘to be or have been abused. . . , 
or shall be hereafter censed unto.’’ This provision would 
seem to have forbidden the censing of such images, and at all 
events would have attained the same end by making the 
censing of them a cause for their removal, but in no wise inter- 
fered with the use of incense in the accustomed manner, except 
as to the censing of these particular images. If, therefore, the 
reference in the Rubric is to the second regnal year, apart from 
the Statute 2 and 3 Edward VI.,c. I., it is claimed that censers 
and incense were for the reasons above indicated retained, and 
in use, in the Church of England. Whatever the exact legal 
force of the Injunctions of Edward may be, they are at least 
useful as evidence of the then existing practice, and the altera- 
tions intended to be effected in that practice. Further, 
these ornaments were retained and in use in the second year 


1 See Moore’s special report of Westerton v. Liddell, p. 160. 

* The earliest dated edition is that of the 8th day of March in 
the third year of Edward. 

3 The injunctions of 1536 and Thomas Cromwell’s Injunctions of 
1538 did not deal with Incense, though the latter enjoined that “ preachers 
were to instruct their people against the ordinary superstitions of wander- 
ing on pilgrimages and offering candles and tapers to relics.” 


wi 


33 


by the authority of Parliament—viz., under 25 Henry VIIL., 
c. 19, s. 7, which kept in force “Canons, Constitutions, 
Ordinances, and Synodals Provincial already made and not 
contrarient nor repugnant to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs 
of this Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the King’s 
prerogative royal.” And it was further provided that they 
should ‘still be used and executed as they were afore the mak- 
ing of this Act.’ Thus, in Edward’s second year the use of 
ncense was authorized indirectly, if not directly, by Parliament, 
inasmuch as Parliament had not only not forbidden it, but 
had expressly retained the old order and the authority 
of the Ecclesiastical laws and customs so far as they 
did not conflict with the law of the realm or hurt 
the royal prerogative. To say the least, the use of incense 
had as much Parliamentary authority in the second regnal 
year of Edward as any other observance of the Church. 

But assuming that it is to the First Prayer Book, and the 
Act which gave it legal force, that reference must be made to 
ascertain what are the ornaments of the Church and Ministers 
intended by the present Ornaments Rubric, it is submitted 
that the use of incense is equally in accordance with law. Sir 
R. Phillimore, in Martin v. Mackonochie (L. R. 2 Ad. and 
Nice, av (p; (215), says of imcense, ‘It certainly was. in 
use in the Church of England in the time of King Edward 
the Sixth’s First Prayer Book.’ The Reformers of 1549 
intended to preserve the continuity of the Church and her 
Services except so far as the latter contained, or seemed 
to authorize, superstitious practices or medizval accretions 
of erroneous doctrine, and except so far as was necessary 
to effect the main purpose of simplifying and reducing 
to order the complex and confused methods of worship 
which had come into use. The Statute 2 and 3 Ed. I., c. 
I, in its preamble, expressly states that the Commissioners 
appointed to draw up the First Book would have ‘“‘as well eye 
and respect to the most sincere and pure Christian religion 
taught by the Scripture as to the usage in the primitive 
Church,” and the Act which established the Second Book 
(5 and 6 E. 6, c. 1) described the First Book as ‘‘a very Godly 
order set forth by authority of Parliament,” and “agreeable to 

D 


34 


the Word ot God and the primitive Church.” Nor are there 
wanting in the phraseology of the First Book itself evidences 
that it was to be used and interpreted in accordance with 
ancient practice and custom, so far as the same were not 
incompatible with the order prescribed by the Book. For 
instance, the Holy Communion Service is said to be ‘‘com- 
monly called the Mass”; the vestments prescribed by the 
fourth Rubric before the Holy Communion Service are 
described as “the vesture appointed for that ministration” ; 
those prescribed for the assistant Ministers are called ‘the 
vestures appointed for their ministry.” The same Rubric pro- 
ceeds: ‘then shall the Clerks sing in English for the Office or 
Introit (as they call it) a psalm.” In the first Rubric at the 
end of the same Service mention is made of ‘‘the accustomed 
blessing,’ and provision is made for cases ‘‘ where the people 
hath not been accustomed to pay any Holy Bread,” and there 
is an express direction that the Bread for the Communion shall 
be ‘‘something more larger and thicker than it was.” Again, 
in the preface to the Order for Confirmation, that rite is stated 
to be ‘“‘agreeable with the usage of the Church in times past.” 
So, again, the Banns of Marriage are to be asked “in the Ser- 
vice time, the people being present, after the accustomed manner.” 
Again, ‘‘the woman that is purified must offer her chrisom and 
other accustomed offerings.’ Lastly, in the Service for Ash 
Wednesday, ‘‘the English Litany shall be said after the 
accustomed manner,” and the 51st Psalm is to be said ‘where 
they are accustomed to say the Litany.” ! 

It is submitted, therefore, that under the First Prayer Book 
the Service of Holy Communion continued to be celebrated 
with the accompaniment of incense in the accustomed manner, 
there being nothing in that book to forbid or alter the manner 
of its use, and the Injunctions of Edward, though forbidding 
many things, not prohibiting or limiting in any way (except the 
censing of images above-mentioned) the old use. In Westerton 
v. Liddell Dr. Lushington speaks of “ the irresistible argument, 


1 In the first Rubric at the end of ihe Communion Service it is 
provided that the Litany shall be said ‘after such form as is appointed 
by the King’s Majesty’s Injunctions.” 


30 


that the last Statute of Uniformity, by referrin, to the First 
Book of Common Prayer of Edward VI., excluded not only the 
Second Book of Common Prayer, but everything else effected 
in the interval between 1549 and 1662, whether by ANctn or 
Parliament or by Canon, which could or might have altered 
what existed in 1549.” 1 But, as a matter of fact, what was 
done in 1558-9 by Elizabeth’s Act of Uniformity, and re-enacted 
by the present Ornaments Rubric under the Caroline Act of 
Uniformity, was to establish those ornaments of the Church, 
whether worn or otherwise used by the Minister, as were 
used under, if not those used before, the First Book. 
The words of the Judgment of the Privy Council in the 
same case on this point are very clear, and are as 
follows ? :—‘ After the overthrow of Protestantism by Queen 
Mary, and its restoration on the accession of Queen Elizabeth, 
a great controversy arose between the more violent and the 
more moderate Reformers as to the Church Service which 
should be re-established, whether it should be according to the 
First, or according to the Second Prayer Book of Edward the 
VI. The Queen was in favour of the First, but she was 
obliged to give way, and a compromise was made, by which 
the Services were to be in conformity with the Second Prayer 
Book, with certain alterations; but the Ornaments of the 
Church, whether those worn or those otherwise used by 
the Minister, were to be according to the First Prayer 
Book. In conformity with this arrangement, the Act 
t Eliz., c. 2, was passed.’ And further on, speaking 
of the Rubric in Elizabeth’s book, ‘“‘ Here the term 
‘ornaments’ is used as covering both the vestments 
of the Minister and the several articles used in the 
Services; it is confined to such things, as in the perform- 
ance of the Services the Minister was to use.” And 
again, ‘“‘The Rubric to the present Prayer Book adopts 
the language of the Statute of Elizabeth ; but they all obviously 
mean the same thing, that the same dresses and the same 
utensils, or articles, which were used under the First Prayer 


1 Moore, pp. 31 and 32. 
2 Moore, pp.158 and 159. 


36 


Book of Edward VI. may still be used.” In support of this 
view, a very important piece of evidence is contained in the 
letter written by Sandys, afterwards Archbishop of York, on 
April 30th, 1559—two days after the passing of Elizabeth’s Act 
of Uniformity—and addressed to Parker, afterwards Arch- 
bishop of Canterbury. This letter is to be found quoted 
in Cardwell’s ‘‘ Conferences,” p. 36, and it is the more 
worthy of attention as Sandys was not himself in favour of 
_ the ornaments. Speaking of the provision in the Elizabethan 
Act of Uniformity (sec. 13), he says, ‘The last Book of 
Service is gone through with a proviso to retain the ornaments 
which were used in the first and second year of King Edward 
VI., until it please the Queen to take other order for them: our 
gloss upon this text is that we shall not be forced to use them; 
but that others in the meantime shall not convey them away, 
but that they may remain for the Queen.” ! Notwith- 
standing the dishonesty of this gloss, the statement of fact is 
strong contemporaneous evidence of the real meaning of the 
compromise which was made effective by that Act. 

In the Appendix will be found a collection of instances 
showing the existence of censers, and the use of incense, 
since 1549; but, in considering these, it should be noted 
that the Church of England has never, since that date, 
decreed that it shall be used in any other manner than as 
it had been used before that time, and it is the old use 
that is to be followed unless and until the Church should 
make fresh regulations for its use, and this although the use 
may have in later times varied in different places and under 
different surroundings. 

Next, if censers are, as it is submitted they are, ornaments, 
they must have been retained for use, and the use of them is 
not an additional ceremony, but is either not a ceremony at all 
but only a subsidiary detail of the act of worship or entire 
ceremony composing the Service in which it is used, or, if a 
ceremony, is one allowed, if not prescribed, by the Rubric and 
Statute as above construed, and therefore not a ceremony 
additional to or other than those provided for by the Statutes of 


* Lambeth MSS, 959 [40]. 


37 


Uniformity and the present book. Moreover, the use of incense, 
if the above argument is correct, has statutory authority ; for 
the Ornaments Rubric has the force of a Statute, being part of 
a book prescribed by and incorporated into the Act of 
Uniformity (14, Car. 2, c. 4, s. 1) and annexed thereto. Now 
a Statute loses none of its validity by disuse. A familiar 
illustration of the principle that the effect of a Statute 
cannot be lost by disuse is the case of Wager of Battle.} 
Long continued desuetude of a Statute may be a very cogent, 
and perhaps a conclusive, argument against entorcing 
obedience to its provisions. It cannot make that unlawful 
which the Statute either enjoins or permits. The Civil 
Wars, and then the Commonwealth, and then the sleep of 
religious feeling under the Georges, account for disuse 
for a time, but afford no reason why, when the sleepers 
awake, they should be deprived of a form or accompaniment of 
worship which is innocent in itself, and to which they are 
impelled as their forefathers were before them. A_ very 
exhaustive answer to the argument from disuse is to be found 
in Sir R. Phillimore’s judgment in Martin.v. Mackonochie, 
L. R. 2 Ad. and Ecc., pp. 175-190. 

lt has sometimes been urged that what is not stated to be 
permitted is prohibited, and that the effect of the Acts of 
Uniformity and the directions contained in the Prayer Book is 
to exclude every ornament and every ceremony which is not 
the subject of express provision. If this argument were 
allowed to prevail, the Services of the Church could not be 
carried on. The compilers of the Prayer Book were well 
aware that there had always existed in the Church of England 
a large body of usage or ecclesiastical common law, which 
had been carefully preserved by the Statute of Henry VIII. 
The compilers of the Prayer Book did not intend to 
invalidate the whole of this usage, or to repeal the 
whole of the common law of the Church not expressly 
incorporated in the Prayer Book. 

But further, it is a rule of English law laid down by Lord 


1 See Judgment of Dr. Lushington Moore, p. 45. 


38 


Coke! that ‘a Statute made in the affirmative without 
any negative, express or implied, doth not take away the 
common law,” and Blackstone? says that though where 
the common law and a Statute differ the common law 
gives place to Statute, and an older Statute to a new 
one, yet this is to be understood only when the latter Statute is 
couched in negative terms, or by its matter necessarily implies 
a negative, but that if both acts be merely affirmative, and the 
substance such that both may stand together, here the latter 
does not repeal the former, but they shall both have a concurrent 
efficiency. 

At the present time it is not doubted by anyone that 
the use of coloured altar cloths, and the cross, and 
credence table, and candlesticks, and turning to the 
East during the reading of the Creeds, and the saying of 
“Glory be to Thee, O Lord” before the reading of the 
Gospel, and the expression of thanks after it, and the use of 
hymns, are legal, although each would be unlawful if it were 
true that omission is equivalent to prohibition. 

A typical illustration of the inconvenience which would 
arise if such an argument were sound is afforded by the First 
Prayer Book of Edward V1., which contained various direc- 
tions concerning the administration of the Holy Communion, 
but no reference to ‘‘ a fair linen cloth.” If only that which is 
expressly permitted, or directed, is lawful, the use of a “ fair 
linen cloth” at the time of the Celebration would have been 
illegal in the year 1549. Other illustrations might be adduced 
even from the present book, but the truth is that both law and 
common sense require that in such a case, as in every other 
not expressly provided for, the minister of the Church must 
look to ‘‘an unwritten. use, the foundation of a common law 
for the Church not less than for the State.’3 The real 
question to be determined is what was the use of the Church 
of England, and if the practice in question appears to have been 


1 2 Inst. 200. 

? Blackstone’s Commentaries, Introduc., sec. By spatase7 Violemie 
7 Edn., p. 89. 

8 Sir R, Phillimore, 2 Ad. and Ecc., at p. 198. 


39 


the practice of the Church of England, and not to have been 
expressly or by necessary implication prohibited, liberty to 
restore that practice, provided that the ministration to which it 
is subsidiary has been retained, is respectfully claimed. 

What has been said above with regard to incense is, it is 
submitted, applicable also to the use of lighted candles at the 
reading of the Gospel and in processions. The lights which 
were forbidden or taken away by the Injunctions of Edward VI. 
were stationary and more or less permanent lights in front of 
statues, etc. ; and the Injunctions did not interfere with the 
lights which at that time were part of the accustomed ritual. 
Luther, in his ‘“‘ Formula Missze et Communionis,” written 
for the Church of Wittenberg in 1523, speaks of incense and 
candles in connection with the reading of the Gospel as follows :— 
“‘Sexto, sequitur Evangelii lectio. Ubi nec candelas neque 
thurificationem prohibemus, sed nec exigimus, esto hoc liberum.” 

The spirit which animated Luther in framing this regula- 
tion is the spirit which also animated the Reformers of 1549, 
and it was their design not to forbid or interfere with the 
accustomed ornaments of Divine Service where those orna- 
ments were not productive of superstitious practice or erroneous 
doctrine. They meant to extirpate abuses, leaving the wor- 
ship of the primitive Church after such extirpation to continue 
as of old time, and Parliament, in establishing forms for wor- 
ship in spirit and in truth in the place of perversions and delu- 
sions, intended that prohibitions sanctioned by the most grave 
penalties should apply to rites, ceremonies, and forms ot public 
worship supposed to be of pernicious danger, and did not intend 
that the prescribed form should be construed to be a precise 
ceremonial with a hard and fast line, so that any addition, however 
minute, however indifferent in regard to the opinions then in con- 
flict, should nullify the prescribed Form, and create thereby 
another Form, suchas the Statute intended to prohibit. The com- 
mand to do things forbids the leaving of those things undone, and 
where the intention of the legislature appears by legitimate 
construction the command to do forbids the violation of that 
intention. Beyond that line the command does not operate to 
restrict, but leaves action free. Worship is the attempt of the 
mortal spirit to hold converse with the Almighty Eternal, and 


40 


all public worship must be for order’s sake on an agreed Form. 
But the Form should be construed with latitude, taking care 
not ‘“‘in any case to restrict within narrower limits than the 
Law has imposed the discretion which within those limits is 
justly allowed to Congregations by the rules both of the 
Ecclesiastical and the Common Law Courts.” } 


1 Moore, p. 189. 


43 


mer ENTS A. 


Motes ON VIE BARLY HISTORY OF PEs 
USE OF INCENSE. 


I. The use of Incense in the ceremonial of the Old 
Covenant was very prominent. Twice daily Incense was 
offered on the Altar of Incense (Ex. xxx. 7, 8) which stood in 
the Holy Place before the Veil, and was reserved for this special 
purpose. On the great Day of Atonement the High Priest 
brought Incense into the Holy of Holies that the cloud of the 
Incense might cover the mercy-seat (Lev. xvi. 12). Incense 
was included among the offerings made to God (Numb. vil. 
14, and Ex. xxv. 6, &c.), and formed part of some of the sacri- 
fices, especially in connexion with the meal-offering and the 
eieweread (ley, i. I, 155 Vi 155 xxiv. 7; Mal. i. 17). 
Special directions were given for its composition (Ex. xxx. 
34), and the use was reserved for worship (Jd. 37, 38), and 
confined to the Levitical priesthood (Numb. xvi.), and accepted 
from them by way of propitiation (Numb. xvi. 46) and as 
symbolizing the acceptableness of prayer (Ps. cxli. 2). 

All this was in full force in the time of the Incarnation: the 
offering of the Incense in the Temple was considered the 
highest honour of the priesthood: it was daily assigned by 
lot, and the privilege was allowed only once in a priest’s life- 
time. It was the day when this unique privilege fell to the 
lot of Zachariah that God chose as the time for sending the 
first inimediate intimation of the coming of our Saviour! 


1 See Edersheim, “ Life and Times of Jesus,” Book il.,c. ili (S. Luke i.9). 


44 


Incense was one of the significant offerings brought by the 
Wise Men to Our Lord (Matt. ii. 11), and from the point of 
view of symbolism was an offering of permanent value, for 
while the offering of myrrh as symbolizing Our Lord’s Passion 
may be held to have become obsolete, this can hardly be urged 
about Incense, which symbolizes Our Lord’s priestly inter- 
cession, any more than it can be urged about the offering of 
gold which we retain in the Eucharistic Offertory. 

The use of Incense in Christian Worship as set forth in the 
Apocalypse is most definite and full, and this gives the highest 
Christian sanction to what might otherwise have been looked 
upon as one of the transient parts of Levitical ceremonial. At 
the Adoration of the Lamb ‘the four living creatures and the 
four and twenty elders” had ‘‘each one a harp and golden 
bowls full of Incense which [bowls] are the prayers of the 
saints”’ (Rev. v. 8). 

At a later stage ‘‘ Another angel came and stood over the 
Altar having a golden censer; and there was given unto him 
much Incense that he should add it unto the prayers of all the 
saints upon the golden Altar which was before the throne. 
And the smoke of the Incense with the prayers of the saints 
went up before God out of the angel’s land”’ (Rev. viii. 3, 4). 

The witness of the Bible is then strongly in favour of a 
ceremonial use of Incense as symbolizing prayer, especially 
the mediatorial intercession of Christ, and as being in itself an 
offering acceptable to God. 


II. In spite of the precedent set by the Jewish ceremonial 
and continued in the ceremonial of the Apocalypse the Chris- 
tian Church in the earliest days seems to have made little or no 
use of Incense as a part of liturgical worship. Athenagoras, in 
answer to the charge that Christians were atheists, because 
they oftered no sacrifice replied :— . 


. ~ ~ an in \ \ ~ +> 
O rovde Tov TavTOc Cnuovpyoe Kat wari ov detrac aiparoc, ovoEe 
\ ~ Ne ~ ~ , * 
Kvloone, ovoe THe amo TOY aVOGY Kal Oupwaparwy evwoiac, avToce wy 
, ’ 7 iN Q , 
H Tedela Evwola, avEevoejc Kal ampoadenc. . . . . KaliToe TpoapEepEry 


Q7 > / ~ , \ \ \ tf Mh 
CEOV GVALMAKTOYV Ouciay KL TV Noyerny TPOTUVELV Aarpeiay. 


Legatw pro Christianis, § 13. Migne. P. G. vi. 916. 


45 


Similarly Tertullian, in describing Christian worship in 
response to a similar charge, says:— 


“*Tlluc [in coelum] suspicientes Christiani, manibus expansis 
quia innocuis, capite nudo quia non erubescimus, denique sine 
monitore quia de pectore oramus, precantes sumus omnes 
semper pro omnibus semper imperatoribus. . . . Hec ab alio 
orare non possum quam a quo scio me consecuturum, quoniam 
et ipse est qui solus prestat, et ego sum cui impetrare debetur, 
famulus eius qui... . ei offero opimam et maiorem 
hostiam, quam ipse mandavit, orationem de carne pudica 
. . . . non grana thuris uniusassis, Arabicz arboris lacrymas, 
nec duas meri guttas... ..” 


A pologeticus, § xxx. Migne. P. L.i. 442-444. 


Again, in a string of sentences describing the Christian’s 
avoidance of heathen ceremonies and the parallel usages 
which they encouraged :— 


Thura plane non emimus: si Arabiz queruntur, scient 
Sabaei pluris et carioris suas merces Christianis sepeliendis 
profligari quam diis fumigandis. 


A pologeticus § xlii. P. L. 1. 493. 


These passages show clearly that the Christian use of 
Incense in the second century was confined (so far as the 
evidence goes) to funerals, where it was used primarily for 
sanitary and not for liturgical purposes. Another passage in 
Tertullian bears this out, where, in defending the Christian’s 
privilege to use rightly the things wrongly used in idol-worship, 
he says :— 

Nam et ego mihi gallinaceum macto non minus quam 
ZEsculapio Socrates, et, si me odor alicuius loci offenderit, 


Arabiz aliquid incendo, sed non eodem ritu nec eodem habitu 
nec eodem apparatu quo agitur apud idola. 


ID (Caparigs <1 IE, ill, (fo), 


46 


Clement of Alexandria complains that the heathen will 
believe in the sanctity of the altar at Delos :— 


; é \ \ > > rE 
Popov d& &rnBGc &ywv THY duatay Puxhy, Kat 70 amr avTifc 


, ~ tA 
Ovpiapa ry doiay evyny A€yovow hiv amoThsove.. 


Styom. vii. 6, [§ 32]. P. G. ix. 445: 


And in the Pedagogue he argues that the heathen ceremonies, 
with unguents, garlands, and incense, are not for Christians :— 


. ~ ~ P, \ , , \ ate 
Ei yowy rie eiwoiac TO Oupiapa roy péyay aoxLepea TOY KUpLOY 
‘ 3 dé » Oca, pr) Avail Trav al evwolay Ovpucaparo 
dvadéoey Néyouey TH eG, pu) Ovoiay ravTny Kal evwciay Ouvpeaparoc 
/ ‘ \ ~ \ , \ rf 
yoouyTwy. adda yao TO THE ayarne dEKTOy avahepety Tov Kuowr, 


Ss aN ‘ SY Shsauges iN 6 a 5 , rf) 
THY TVEVILATLRYY EVWOLAY, ©LC S70, VOLAOTIOLOYV TaAOa EX Eo WV. 


Pedagogus ii. 8,*[§ 67]. P. G. viii. 473. 


Origen continued the same apologetic line in the next 
Cempubey s—— 


> Ss nw > , \ kx 

Popol pév cio tiv 70 Exdorov THY CuKaiwy HyEmovuKoY, ad ov 

vd ~ ~ \ 

avaréumerat (ANB Kal vonr@c evwdyn Ovpudpara, ai TeoTEVXAl Gro 
ovvewnoewc Kalapac. quoting Apoc. vili., and Ps. cxli. 


Contra Celsum vil. 17. P.G. xi. 1541. 


sd , if , > ft ~ -] € ~ te \ ‘ 
Ovcepia svyxoloic Eore ovTE THY TAP ud wyadparwy Tedc TH 
> aN ~ £Q ~ by ~ ‘] € ~ a} ~ SEN e/ ef 
ayahpatra tov eOvwy, ovTe TwY Tap tiv Pwu@y Kal, ty oiTwe 
5 , iy \ / , , a) \ N > & 
dvopacw, Oupuaparwy rede Tove éKxEivwY Pwpove Kal TaC TAP advTotc 
f 
kviooac Kal aipara. 


1b..20.. (POGRSSi ar s48- 


Arnobius at a still later date discusses thepoint at length, ! 
and argues, in reply to the heathen objector, that the use of 
incense among the Romans was novel, and in itself senseless 
and inapplicable to Divine beings. The contempt which he 
pours upon it, as a mere gum, is enough to prove that in 
his experience it was not used in Christian worship. Similar 
treatment is found in Lactantius. 2 


1 Arnobius, Adv. Gentes vii. 26-28. P. L. v. 1253-1258. 
? Lactantius, Div. Instit. vi. 25. P. L., vi. 730. 


47 


In the fourth century S. Austin supplies a trace of the same 
spirit when commenting on Ps. xlix.(l.) 14, Immola deo 
sacrificium laudis, he says :— 


Securi sumus: non imus in Arabiam thus quaerere, non 


sarcinas avari negotiatoris excutimus: sacrificium laudis 
quaerit a nobis Deus. 


Enarr. im ps. xlix. 21. P. L. xxxvi. 578. 


Such language as this is hardly to be regarded as compatible 
with any widely-recognised liturgical use of Incense : it is true 
that it would not weigh heavily against any positive evidence 
of such ause!; but it is only during the latter period of the 
prevalence of such language that any such contrary evidence is 
forthcoming, and in the absence of any such evidence during 
the earlier period such passages as these can only be taken as 
disproving (so far as they go) the liturgical use of Incense. 

Another argument in the same direction is afforded by the 
character of the early patristic comments on Mal. i. 11. 
“‘ Though its Eucharistic reference is nearly always maintained, 
the allusion to Incense is either passed over in silence or 
explained as referring to prayer in connection with Rev. v. 8.”’? 

The only conclusion to be drawn is then that the 
liturgical use of Incense is not attested during the first three 
centuries, except in so far as its use in funerals can be called 
liturgical. The result is remarkable, because it might well 
have been expected a priori that the Christian Church would 
have followed the precedent set alike by the Old and by the 
New Testament. 

In view of the scantiness of the evidence available about 
any of the liturgical customs of the first three centuries, it is 
open to anyone to hold that this lack of attestation is not in 
itself a strong argument. But, on the other hand, there is a 


1 Any more than such passages in Holy Scripture as Isaiah i. 13, 
which depreciate and almost seem to condemn the use, though from other 
sources it is known to have been divinely ordered and actually prevalent. 

2 BLE. Warren. Liturgy. of the Ante-Nicene Church, p. 130, referring to 
Didache xiv. ; Justin Martyr, Dialog. cum Tryphone, 28, 41, 116, 117 ; Irenzeus 
Heres. iv. 17,18; Tertullian Adv. Judaos, 5; Adv. Marcionem iii. 22. 


48 


fact ready to hand to serve as a presumptive explanation why 
the Christian Church should have thought best to forego the 
liturgical use of Incense—an explanation which is entirely in 
harmony with the passages from Christian writers quoted 
above. 

Incense was intimately associated with pagan rites: the 
burning of incense at a tripod before a statue or a picture of 
the Emperor was the overt act of apostasy to which it was 
sought to force the Christians ; to consent was to deny Christ, 
to refuse was equivalent to courting martyrdom. Under such 
circumstances it is no wonder if incense found no place in 
services of Christians; the wonder is that they could bring them- 
selves, as Tertullian boasts that they could, to make any use 
of it whatsoever. 

There are signs, also, that in the early days the Church 
was not greatly disposed to follow Jewish lines, and therefore 
the Biblical authority for incense, so far as it was drawn from 
Levitical ceremonial, would have told against the use of 
incense rather than for it. This consideration would thus 
strongly reinforce the repugnance to incense as a pagan 
ceremony. 


III. On the other hand, from the time of Constantine 
onwards there are clear signs of the use of Incense in at any 
rate some parts of the Christian Church; and passages such 
as that quoted from St. Augustine, which at a later date speak 
against the use of incense, ought, perhaps, to be treated as 
merely rhetorical. The custom seems so well established, 
at least in Rome, early in the [Vth century, that we can only 
conciude that at least during the later part of the IlIIrd 
century the attitude of the Church to incense had been 
altering. With the decay of paganism it was ceasing to carry 
with it objectionable associations, and was becoming more 
available for Christian use. Consequently the objections 
which had so far prevented the Church from following on the 
Jewish and Biblical line were being removed in various 
quarters and in various degrees. 

At first, however, there is very little trace to be found of 
its use ceremonially. The traditions were mainly those of a 


49 


use at funerals, and the first step to be taken was to graft 
upon this utilitarian custom a symbolical and spiritual mean- 
ing; it was a very natural and easy step, since the Biblical 
symbolism of incense as representing acceptableness and 
prayer was such an obvious and clear one. 
In the East the following passage in the Testament of St. 
Ephraim Syrus seems to show the transition from the funeral 
and precautionary use to the definite liturgical use. 


Lay me not with sweet spices : for this honour avails me no . 
Nor with incense and perfume : for the honour befits me not. 
Burn sweet spices in the Holy Place: and me, even me, conduct to 
the grave with prayers ; 
Give ye incense to God : and over me send up hymns 
Instead of perfumes of spices : in prayer make remembrance of me. 
What can goodly odour profit : to the dead who cannot perceive it ? 
Bring them in and burn them in the Holy Place: that they which 
enter may smell the savour. 
Testament of St. Ephraim (tr. Gwynn), 


Nicene and Post Nicene Fathers, vol. xvili., 135 (1899). 


The document has probably been interpolated, but this 
passage has the metrical rhythm of the authentic text, and is 
recognized by Dr. Gwynn as genuine; it may, therefore, be 
taken as good evidence of the last quarter of the fourth 
century. 

It is more difficult to estimate two other valuable pieces of 
evidence. A passage in the Apostolic Constitutions, which occurs 
in the second book, speaks thus :— 


ef ~ \ ° e ~ 9 Li ~ y , 
al TE XHoat Kal dppavol tuGy Eic TUTOY Tov BvataaTnoiou AEdoYyio- 
Owoay wir, at re rapbEvor etc TuTov Tov Oupuarnoliov reryspoOwoar 
Kal TOU Ovpudparoc. 


Ap. Const. ii. 26; for similar comparisons see ii. 6 & iv. 3. 


A comparison such as this is no mere mystical or rhetorical 
passage, but shows evidently that it was addressed to people who 
were familiar with the use of incense in their worship. But 
it is significant that while the first part of the comparison is 
ancient, being part of the Didaskalia—the early IIIrd century 
document which forms the groundwork of the Apostolic Consti- 

E 


50 


tutions—the second part, which concerns Incense, belongs to the 
writer who compiled the Apostolic Constitutions at the end of the 
IVth century. This evidence, then, belongs to the later date. 

The third of the Apostolic Canons mentions incense with oil 
as among the things which were to be accepted as offerings at 
the offertory. 


oe \ yf a 
M)) ébov d€ éorw moocdyecOai Te ErEpov sic TO BvaovacrHowy 1) 


EXavoy eic THY AvXViay Kal Bupiapa THO KALO® Tic ayiac TooTPonae. 


Bruns Canones i. 1. 


This Canon cannot be traced to any early source, and is 
probably due to the hand which compiled both Apostolic Canons 
and Afostolic Constitutions towards the end of the fourth 
century. Its main interest lies in the fact that it connects the 
Incense with the oil for the lamp. This seems to point toa 
liturgical and not a mere funereal use. The Western evidence 
would lead one to suppose that it was to be burnt in a hanging 
censer, to perfume the church and symbolize prayer, just as the 
oil was burnt in a hanging lamp, both for symbolical purposes 
and for actual lighting ; but there is no Eastern evidence forth- 
coming at this date of such a practice.? 


A curious commentary is moreover supplied by a passage 


in Constantine’s Oration to the Assembly of the Saints, where 
he says :— 


Kat rovavrn ric evyaprariac Bvaia Tote avooaow amoreNeirat, dyyn 

el x . 

pév aiparoc dyn o&€ réone Biac. ovd€ pojy dap) AiBavwy éxurobi- 

voe SP SI - (a) \ nya ~ ef 2 pd \ ~ 

Tat OVE TOKAIA, KaMapoY CE PwC, daov ELapKecat TOdE Exap LY ToIC 
EVKOMEVOLC. 


Or. ad Sanct. Catum xii. P. G. xx. 1272. 


1 See Brightman’s summary of the case in Liturgies Eastern and Western, 
I, xvii-xxix. (Oxford, 1896). 
*In 591 the Persian King Chosroes sent to Gregory, Patriarch of 


Antioch, money to provide a golden chalice, altar cross, and censer for 
the Church (Evagr. Hist. vi. 21). 


This might be interpreted as a Christian disclaimer of 
incense were it not known that it certainly was used at any 
rate in some places at this time and that Constantine himself 
was familiar with it, for his benefactions at Rome (to be noted 
later on) prove this beyond any vestige of doubt. In the East 
such evidence as is forthcoming is not very conclusive. 

Eusebius, in his panegyric delivered at Tyre in 312, hasa 
passage on the useof Incense, which is certainly figurative, but 
which may perhaps refer to some actual use of Incense :— 


Lepvoy o€ Kal péya cal povoyevec Ouawaorhpioy Toto ey Ein i} Tijc 
TOU KOLYOD TAaYTWY lepéwe Tig Wuyxiie 70 eidixpivec kal Wwyiwy wytoy ; a 
Taptatwe ert Ceca 6 péyac TOY OdwY cp LEpEvC avroc “Inoove 6 povo- 
yevnc TOU OEod, TO Tapa TavTwy Edw@deEC Ovpiapa cal rag ov ebyor 
avaipouc Kai avdove Bvciac padpe TO Préppare Kal Urriaue brodexo- 
pevoc XEpal TH Kar’ ovpavoy ILarpi cal Oo rév bor TAPATEMTETAL, 
TpOToc airoc TpockvvGy Kal povoc T@ Mlarpi ro Kar’ abiay arovépwr 
aéBac, eira Ce Kal rdow tiv etpeviy dvapévery Kat dey eic cel 


TAPALTOUMEVOC. 


Euseb. fist. Eccl. x. 4, § 68. 


The same writer, in describing the Church of the Holy 
Sepulchre at Jerusalem, and other Churches founded by Con- 
stantine and Helena, makes no distinct mention of incense or 
censer,! and if such passages as the above stood alone they 
would not be a very strong argument for the use of incense; 
but as it is, in view of the more detailed evidence available as 
to Constantine’s foundations at Rome, they have their value. 

When a metaphorical passage appears in Origen, and he 
argues that pride in the case of priests causes that— 


Dealtari domini quod deberet incensi suavitate fragrare 
odor teterrimus superbiz et elationis renidet. 


Origen, Homil. in liby. Judic. iii. 2. P. G. xii. 693. 


it is unsafe to build upon the passage, because we have no 
other witness to the use of Incense in the IIIrd century. 


1 Life of Const., i. 42; iii. 25-51; iv. 43-47, 58-60; unless indeed the 
Kparfipes weyloro: mentioned in ili, 33 were meant for Incense, as is not 
impossible. These are the only ornaments specifically mentioned. 


52 


Further, in subsequent periods similar passages are not un- 
common where the use and terminology of the Jewish worship 
are mystically applied to Christian worship—for example, the 
following :— 


KareBpaddovro pev OlKOL TOOTEVXAC UTO XELWOY avooiwY, civ eT pE- 
mero O€ Yvouarhowa, Kal ovK ty TeOTHOpA, ovce Oupiapa ov TOTO TOU 
KANT OOH, 

St. Basil, Homilia in Gorvdium Martyrem, § 2. 
PIG. AR AGo. 


and it is difficult in such cases to say whether there is any real 
reference to the use of Incense or not. 

Again, the well-known words of Hosius to Constantine are 
no doubt to be taken in direct reference to the presumption of 
King Uzziah, as narrated in 2 Chron. xxvi. 16, and it is 
questionable how far they have a bearing upon the Christian 
use of Incense. 


= A = Pv dat a \ es me 
Otre roivuy piv dpyew ext rie yite ekeotiy, ore ov Tov Ouyuway 
+ / 
élovoiay exEtc. 


Athanasius. Hust. Avian. 44. P. G. xxv. 745. 


Another passage which is often quoted with confidence on 


behalf of the early use of Incense is of similarly doubtful 
value. 


~ \ \ Cas , / 2 , ot ‘ s! 
mevOovor o€ Kal ai ExxAnoiat TévOoc péya, Suore ovTE Tpoopopa ovTE 
Oupiapa exrereirar, ovre Narpela Oetpecroc. 


Pseudo-Hippolytus De consummatione mundi. xxxiv 
Berlin Patrol. i. 303. 


It is very probable that the date of this is no earlier than 
the sixth century; but in any case the passage is very 
inconclusive. 

It must be recognized, therefore, that in spite of all these 
passages there is a great want of definite information as to the 
use of Incense in the East in the liturgical services of the 
fourth century. There is no mention of it in the Liturgy 
of the Apostolic Constitutions, nor in the Catechetical Lectures 

St. Cyril of Jerusalem. It is unfortunate for this purpose 


53 


that there is no description of the Liturgy in the Peregrinatio of 
St. Silvia of Acquitaine, for an observant traveller such as she 
would have recorded many points which did not come within 
the scope of St. Cyril or the writer of the so-called Clementine 
Liturgy, but which would be of priceless interest to us. .But 
in compensation for this we have her mention of the use of 


Incense at the weekly vigil of Sunday in the Church of the 
Anastasis, 


Dictis ergo his tribus psalmis et factis orationibus tribus, 
ecce etiam thimiamateria inferuntur intro spelunca Anastasis, 
ut tota basilica repleatur odoribus. Et tunc ubistat episcopus 
inter cancellos prendet evangelium et accedet ad hostium et 
leget resurrectionem. 


Peregy. 57. Duchesne Orvigines du Culte (p. 474 or 476.). 


This mention carries us beyond the point already suggested, 
viz., the use of Incense unceremonially in hanging censers, and 
brings us up to a definite ceremonial use, following on upon 
the solemn prayers of the Bishop and preparing for the reading 
of the Gospel. It seems hardly likely that such a ceremony 
as this in the new services which attracted St. Silvia’s 
attention was without its parallels in the traditional use -of 
the Liturgy. 

In the next century there is more ample and more detailed 
evidence. The following description of censing is given in the 
Pseudo- Dionysius. 


6 péy lepdpyne evyny lepay évTo¢ Tov Ovovasrnpiov Tomodpevoc 

> \ Sx 7 Ni ’ 7 Sep ae > ~ ~ (F) ~ eae 
(avrov oy oipae Tov evNoynrov) Kat €& avrov rov Ouuidy apedpevoc 
TEpléepyeTae Thoay THY TEpLoXnY TOU vaov. EiTa dvahvoag wad 


él 70 Oeiov Ovowaorhpwy ardpxerae pera TOY ttrwY Tijc Wahpwoiac. 


De Eccl. Hievarch. ii. Migne. P. G. iii. 452. 


Ered) rolvuy rimoc éoTt TOU OEoU 0 Exloxoroc, WwpmEv THC ApXETae 
~ ~ / ~ > tf \ / Ld / 
Oupidy ard rot Ovocaornpiou Ewe THY ExXaTwy Kal Thdw EravaaTpEpEL 


cic To Oeiov Ovovaorhowy. 


Ib. iii. 3. P. G. iii, 456. 


54 


Another reference will be found in the Life of St. Eutychius 
Patriarch of Constantinople, +582, written by his chaplain, 
Eustratius. 


“ 3 ~ / ae ee , . 
Tairny ovv riv ayiay Edoprny [rod Hacya] pacpme eopracac, 0 
‘ ~ € as Vf 
del ra repli abrijc eEnyotpevoc we Gdoc ovCeElc, THY Aywrarny pEya- 
Any Tov Oeod exxArnolay Oyudcac, Toujoac Kal Ta ayia Barriopara, 


~ ~ \ € ~ ~ 
TUyTAC hoTATkmEVo’ MOXLEPETC kal lepeic Kal TOY EAUTOU KATPOV, Ke T+ Ne 


Vita S. Eutychii x. P.G. 1xxxvi. 2377¢. 


The former passage no doubt describes a Liturgy of the 
Vth century and leads on toa consideration of the evidence 
of the Greek Liturgies in general. It is difficult to estimate 
the real age of the rites! and ceremonies contained in the 
earliest MSS. available ; so it seems wisest simply to investi- 
gate the use of Incense in the best texts available without 
any attempt to assign a date to the various portions of the 
various Liturgies. 


IV. In the Oriental Liturgies the use of Incense is uni- 
versal and on the whole marked by uniformity of method. It 
is to be found (i.) in the Prothesis or solemn preliminary Ser- 
vice of Preparation of the Elements. This use, however, is not 
ancient, as the service is itself a comparatively recent develop- 
ment. See for examples of this the Liturgy of the Nestorians, of 
the Armenians, and the Liturgy of St. Chrysostom in common 
use in the Orthodox Church of to-day.” (ii.) It is used in the 
beginning of the Liturgy proper; in the Liturgy of St. James 
the prayers of incense are said preliminary® to the ‘‘ Mass of the 
Catechumens,” but in other cases they come at the opening 
of this section of the Liturgy. In the Liturgy of St. Mark 
this censing is in connexion with the ‘ Little Entrance,” 4 but 


1 Mr. Brightman considers that the earliest extant Eastern evidence 
for the details of censing is a document mainly of the IXth or perhaps 
Xth century (Lit, E. and W. 539 1. 31), but in this respect perhaps of even 
later date ; and that the fundamental ceremonial use was for the lustration 
of the air. 

2 Brightman, Liturgies Eastern and Western (Oxford 1896), i. 248-251, 


418-420, 359-301. 
FEC See JERS Shu 


55 


its position may best be defined as being the opening of the 
Mass of the Catechumens, as, for example, in the Liturgies of 
the Syrian Jacobites, the Coptic Jacobites, and the Abyssinian 
Jacobites! In the case of the Armenian and St. Chrysostom 
Liturgies the place of this censing seems to be taken by the 
latter part of the censing at the Prothesis, for in both cases 
there is no censing at the Little Entrance which marks the 
opening of the Mass of the Catechumens, but the Prothesis is 
followed by an elaborate censing of the Church and people. 

Thus, in any case, there was the solemn censing as pre- 
liminary to the Service.? 

The censing of the Syrian Jacobites is interesting in 
detail, because of its similarity to the Western use. He 
buyus Incense and says, To the glory, &c., and he takes the 
Incense and, worshipping, censes the midst of the table of life three 
tumes, which 1s a type of the Father, saying, Adoration to the 
Gracious Father, and the north horn he censes three times, which is 
a type of the Son, and says, Adoration to the merciful Son, and 
the south horn he censes three times, which 1s a symbol of the Holy 
Ghost, Adoration to the living and Holy Spirit, and he ascends 
the step and vaises the Incense over the mysteries on the east side, and 
says this Voice, Rejoice, &c.; and bringing it to the west side he 
says, Praise Him, &c., and to the north side saying, Glory, &c., 
and to the south side saying, From everlasting, &c.; and he lowers 
the censey in a circle over the mysteries three times and descends from 
the step. 


(iii.) Incense is used during the reading of the lections, and 
especially at the Gospel. The following is the simple form 
used here in the Liturgy of St. Mark, but derived from the 
Byzantine Liturgy, and there used in the Prothesis. 


e e - ‘\ \ ~ > , ae , 
O iepeve reo Tov ecbayyeriov ParrEr Ovpiapa 
AEywv otrTwe. Ovudpa roochepoper évwroyv Tic aylac ddéne 
¢ A \ 
cou 6 Oedc, 6 moogdebdpevoc Eic TO dywv Kal UrEpoUpavLOY Kal YOEDOY 
gov Ovaaorhpwrv, avruardreploy iywiv TY xapw Tov wyiov gov 


mvevparoc. Ore evhoynpevoc. ks T- r.3 


1 L.c. 74-76, 150-152, 209-212. 2 L.c. 361 and 420. 
3 L.c, 119, 359, and note the connexion with the Offertory Prayer of 
St. Basil, p. 319. 


56 


In the Coptic the Incense begins at the reading of the 
Praxis, the third of the four Lections, while in the Abyssinian 
Liturgy it begins in the first Lection, and is renewed in the 
third (Praxis) and fourth (Gospel). In the ae Liturgy of 
St. Chrysostom the censing at the Gospel is! considerable, and 
includes the censing of the Altar, the Sanctuary, and the 
Priest. 


(iv.) Again, at the beginning of the ‘“ Mass of the Faith- 
ful” Incense is used: sometimes in connexion with the 
“Great Entrance,” as in the Liturgies of St. James, St. Mark, 
St. Chrysostom, and the Armenian, or, failing that, in connexion 
with the opening prayers, as in the Syrian Jacobite, the Coptic 
and the Abyssinian.2 In the case of the latter class the obla- 
tions have been set upon the Altar earlier in the service, and 
some sort of censing of them has already taken place at an 
earlier point, viz., at the beginning of the Mass of the Cate- 
chumens.®? In the Nestorian Liturgy the case is different: 
the paten, which was brought in before the main service, is 
censed at the prayers at the opening of the ‘‘ Mass of the 
Faithful”: the mysteries are set upon the Altar shortly after, 
but a long interval ensues before they are censed.* 

Underlying all this variety there is a certain clear measure 
of uniformity, viz., (a) that (apart from the-Prothesis) Incense is 
used in three places, (i.) at the opening of the main service, 
(ii.) at the Gospel (iii.) at what corresponds in place and often 
in circumstances to the Western offertory : and (0) that in some 
or other way the oblations are censed. ; 


1 Lc. 154; 213-220; 238, 371, 372; see also 258. 

2 L.c. See pp, 41; 122, 123; 378, 379. St. James and St. Mark copy 
the Byzantine Liturgy. See also on the other hand pp. 81; 161 ; 225; 262. 
Of these it seems likely that at least the Syrian Jacobite Liturgy once 
had a ‘*Great Entrance”: and this affords a certain presumption 
that in the other two cases the offering of the oblations has similarly been 
moved away from its original place to the place which it now occupies; 
and further, this suggests that originally all the Liturgies were alike in this 
respect. 

8 Ib, pp. 75,763 1503 210. 

#1092515 20298207, 292). 


57 


There is no need to pursue the subject further in the East : 
there is considerable early evidence of the use of Incense in 
processions outside the Church, and instances of a number of 
other interesting uses of Incense might be collected, but they 
would not be germane to the present subject.1 


V. We turn to the West to see what signs are visible of 
liturgical use of Incense from the beginning of the IVth 
century onward. There is abundant evidence of the still use 
of Incense, burning in hanging censers in a way similar to the 
lamps. We have seen cause to suspect that use in the East, 
and it is even more clear in the West. 


(i.) The Liber pontificalis contains in the biography of St. 
Silvester (314-335) a list of the gifts of Constantine to the 
Church: the biography is not in the main contemporary 
evidence, but it seems clear that this particular information is | 
inserted from some very ancient source, which has every ap-— 


1 (i.) At the deposition of Nestorius at Ephesus, in 431, St. Cyril, on 
announcing the news, was escorted through the city by processions with 
torchbearers and women carrying Incense. (Cyril Alex., Ef. xxiv. (xxii ) 
PaG rivals 157. 


(ii.) In 518, in the course of a great disturbance in Tyre, the Arch- 
deacon, giving notice of a service to be held on the following Sunday, said : 


rej IS 3. Sat ie , ~ of > ee / “ 2 ) 
TH Ce adTh cyig kupiany Ewer EvravOa ouvenxopeba iva evraiba 
pera Yarpwoidy Kal knooy Kal Ouuaparwy éy TH aire ay OK 


\ , / ~ 
Karayrnoayrec THY Qitny Kal THY dylay covaiy TANDWOOpmEY. 


This order was confirmed by the Archbishop in the same terms. See 
Letter of Epiphanius, Bishop of Tyre, to the Council of Constantinople in 
536, Labbe and Cossart Concilia viil. 1092 (Florence, 1762). 


(iii,) Evagrius records how in 526 the Holy Man Zosimas becoming 
miraculously aware, though a great distance away, of the overthrow of 
Antioch by fires and earthquake, called for a censer to propitiate God with 
prayers and Incense. (Evagrius. Hist. iv. 7 ) 


(iv.) Corippus records of Justin “Il. (565-578) Lib. I. De laudibus 
Justini Minoris (quoted in Martigny Dict. des Ant. Chrét. 232), 


llicet- angelici pergens ad limina templi 
Imposuit pia thura focis arasque micantes 
Obtulit, 


58 


pearance of being an authentic record of Constantine’s gifts 
compiled from the actual contemporary Acts of Donation. 

Among the ornaments provided for the new Churches are 
censers (thymiamateria), two weighing thirty pounds for his 
Basilica and one of fifteen pounds for the Baptistery.? In the 
former case there is mention also of Donum aromaticum ante 
altaria annis singulis, lib. cl., which seems to be a benefaction 
for the supply of Incense, analogous to the many benefactions 
given and catalogued for the support of the lamps: there is 
a similar provision for Incense and oil in the case of the 
Church of SS. Marcellinus and Peter. Further, a censer is 
also among the ornaments given to St. Peter’s*: in the case 
of the -remaining Churches there is no mention of such 
ornaments; but the inventories seem to have been abridged.? 

A similar gift appears later among the ornaments of the 
basilica of St. Mary in the life of Xystus III. (432-440),° and 
another in the list of ornaments in the Charta Cornutiana 
of the year 471,’ but the former weighed only five pounds and 
was therefore very likely a portable censer. 


2. Further light is thrown upon this custom by an order 
recorded in the notice of Boniface I. (418-422) :— 


Hic Bonifatius constituit ut nulla mulier aut monacha 
pallam sacratam contingere aut lauare aut incensum ponere in 
ecclesia nisi minister. LP eae 


This is a recast of a similar order ascribed to Soter 
(162-170), but then excluding monks, not women :— 


Hic constituit ut nullus monachus pallam sacratam con- 
tingeret nec incensum poneret in sanctam ecclesiam. Jb., 135. 


It is clear that if this order really belongs to the earlier 
date this use of Incense is traced back into the second century, 
and the foregoing conclusions as to the first three centuries 
must be entirely altered. But there are many difficulties in 
the interpretation of the passage. 


1 Liber Pontificalis, Ed. Duchesne i. cxl,-cliv. PURER Mae, 
> L.P. I. 183. (cf 177, 178, 179) aromata in incensum sanctis martyribus. 
IESE MW, Heap PF MEE Mee, Wis Beey 7 Tb. cxlvi, 


59 


3. The Inventory of Constantine’s gifts seems to show that 
the censers hung before the Altar: but at a later date also 
before the images of saints :— 


Hic [Sergius (687-701)| fecit imaginem auream beati Petri 
Apostoli que est in partem mulierum. Hic fecit tymiamaterium 
aureum maiorem cum columnis et coperculo quem suspendit 
ante imagines tres aureas beati Petri Apostoli, in quo incensum 
et odor suavitatis festis diebus, dum missarum solemnia 
celebrantur, omnipotenti Deo opulentius mittitur.1 


TD. 374% 


4. At about the same date we are able to pass over into 
England and find a similar use of Incense. Archbishop 
Theodore (668-690) gives, among various directions as to the 
right use of Churches, the following :— 


Incensum Domini incendatur in natale Sanctorum pro 
reverentia diei, quia ipsi sicut lilia dederunt odorem suavitatis et 
asperserunt zcclesiam dei sicut incensu aspergitur ecclesia 
primitus juxta altare.” 

Pent. Wi. 9. PLL XCixs 027. 


The forty-third of the Canons of King Edgar ordains as 
follows :— 


“And we enjoin that no holy thing be neglected, 
neither holy water, nor salt, nor incense, nor bread, nor any- 
thing holy.” 

Tr. Thorpe in Ancient Laws and Institutes of England, 
p. 399. (London, 1840.) 


1 There were many similar gifts in the ninth century. L.P. II. 49, 75, 
81, 94, 108, 120, 194, 195. 

2 Schmitz, Bussbiicher ii. 567; Haddan and Stubbs Councils iii. 191. 
Compare a passage quoted in Magani, L’Antica Liturgia Romana ii. 109, 
from Troya, Cod. Dipl Longob., p. 11. p. 513, describing the benefaction of a 
priest to the Cathedral of Cremona :--In die festo S, Sisinnii . . . . accend- 
antur ceri et comburantur thura et aromatha et de eisdem aromatibus 
condiatur corona et pharum ut accendantur in honorem eiusdem sancti 


martyris. 


60 


5. As a comment on this it will be well to quote St. 
Aldhelm’s description of the censer which hung in the Church 
built by Princess Bugga, daughter of Centwin, King of 
Wessex (¢. 725) :— 


Hic quoque thuribulum capitellis undique cinctum 
Pendet de summis fumosa foramina pandens ; 

De quibus ambrosiam spirabunt thura Sabea, 

Quando sacerdotes missas offerre jubentur. 


PL ee os 


An echo of this is found in a passage of Ethelwolf, of 
Lindisfarne, at the beginning of the IXth century, describing 
a church seen in a dream :— 


Omnibus his rutilo capitellis undique cinctum 
Thuribulum pendet fabricatum cominus auro, 
De quibus altithrono spirabant thura tonanti. 


Carmen de Abbatibus Lindisf. P.L. xcvil. 1344. 


The hanging censer thus has a long history, reaching from 
the [Vth century onward.? This use survived in a few places, 
apparently even till the Reformation, as the following reminis- 
cence of Lambarde, the Kentish lawyer, shows :— 


““T myself being a child, once saw in Paul’s Church at 
London at a feast of Whitsuntide, where the coming down of 
the Holy Ghost was set forth by a white pigeon that was let 
to fly out of a hole that is yet to be seen in the midst of the 
roof of the great aisle, and by a long censer which, descending 
out of the same place almost to the very ground, was swung 
up and down to such a length that it reached at one sweep 
almost to the west gate of the church, and with the other to 
the choir stairs of the same, breathing out over the whole 
church and company a most pleasant perfume of such sweet 


1 The lines are wrongly ascribed to Alcuin, See P.L. ci. 1311. 

? For pictures of the hanging censer in Anglo-Saxon times see Brit. 
Mus. Harl. MS. 603 of the XIth century, ff. 9, 13, 13%, 29, 33, 34, 57”. 
Sometimes it has a cover, and sometimes not. 


61 


things as burned therein.” ! Mr. Mackenzie Walcott identifies 
the censer as ‘a great large censer all silver with many 
windows and battlements used to cense withal in the Pentecost 
week in the body of the Church of Paul’s at the Procession 
time,” weighing clviij ounces iij quarters; he also cites Bishop 
Pilkington in confirmation of this custom :— 

‘‘In the midst alley was their long censer, reaching from 
the roof to the ground, as though the Holy Ghost came in 
their censing down in likeness of a dove”’; ? 


and notices a similar opening in the centre of the nave roof 
at Norwich, which was also used as an aperture through 
which to let down a man dressed as an angel to cense the rood. 
A gigantic censer of this nature, hung from the roof, 
is said to be still visible in a Spanish Cathedral. 


A somewhat similar non-ceremonial use is that described as 
still existing in France in the early part of the last century, in 
the Church of St. Martin at Tours. 


Le jour de S. Michel on allume du feu dans neuf pots, 
qu’on pose en neuf endroits de |’Eglise scavoir aux quatre 
coins du Sanctuaire autour du tombeau de S. Martin et du 
Cheeur, & on y jette de l’encens dedans au commencement de 
la Messe et de la Préface. On en distribue aussi quelques 
grains pendant l’Epitre a tous les Bénéficiers qui vont a 
lOffrande les presenter au Célebrant. Et tout cela par 
rapport a l’Offertoire Stetit angelus, &c. 

De Moleon, Voyages Liturgiques, 132 (Paris, 1718). 


Thisillustrates also in a very interesting way the persistence 
of old customs. 


VI. Incense was not infrequently sent as a complimentary 
gift, but for liturgical use, for example, by St. Gregory :— 


Aloa vero, thimiamata storacem et balsamum sacrorum 
martyrum corporibus offerenda latore presentium deferente 


transmisimus. . 
St Greg:, Ep. ix. §25 P. Lulxxvii. 980. 


1 Topographical Dict. of Wm, Lambarde (1536-1601), quoted in 
M. Walcott, Traditions and Customs of Cathedrals, 195. (London, 1872, 
end Ed.) 2 Works, P.S. p. 540. 


62 


Again, by a deacon, Gemmulus, to St. Boniface (¢. 744) :— 


Transmisimus enim... . aliquantum cozumbri quod 
incensum domino offeratis temporibus matutinis et vespertinis 
sive dum missarum celebratis solemnia. 


St. Bonif.-£p. 143. P. L. Ixxxix: 755: 


It is not clear whether this involves anything more than 
the still use of Incense in a hanging censer such as we have 
already seen, or whether it involves the more ceremonial use 
which we now proceed to consider. 


VII. The most crucial passage is one of St. Ambrose 
in his commentary on St. Luke i. 11, and the ministry of 
Zacharias at the Altar of Incense in the Temple. 


Atque utinam nobis quoque adolentibus altaria, sacrificium 
deferentibus, assistat angelus, immo przebeat se videndum. 


Expos. Evang. set. Li. Uy § 28. VP OE Gas. 


This has been, on the one hand, claimed as testimony to 
the ceremonial censing of the Altar at Milan in the [Vth 
century, and, on the other hand, it has been ruled out of court 
altogether as a passage occurring in the midst of a highly 
mystical exposition, and therefore valueless altogether as 
evidence. 

There seems no reason to suppose that St. Ambrose had in 
view only on a Jewish or figurative Altar ; it seems clear that, 
though Milanese customs differed from those of Rome in some 
respects, he must have been familiar with the use of Incense 
in Church. In another passage ! he refers to it, not in a very 
conclusive way, no doubt, but clearly enough for the words 
to be a probable reference to the use of Incense in some shape 
or form : 


Nec verearis ne in convivio ecclesie aut grati odores tibi 
aut dulces cibi desint. 
De Cam et Abel, 19. P. L. xiv. 326. 


1 Another doubtful passage is that where he speaks of the evening as 


hova incensi. De Virgg. III. iv, 18, which may equally refer to lights 
De Vert Explication des Ceremonies ii. 112 (Paris, 1710). 


63 


This is, however, very far from proving that, in using the 
term adolentibus altavia, he had in mind any censing of the 
Altar, or, indeed, any use of Incense, for, apart from this con- 
text and the use of the term in the Vulgate, the phrase does 
not naturally refer to Incense at all, but is a general sacrificial 
term. 

We shall, later on, see reason to believe that the full 
ceremony of censing the Altar was one of the later forms 
of ceremonial use, so that it is probable that, at any rate, there 
is no question of this here. For the rest, our view of these 
two passages of St. Ambrose will largely depend upon what 
ceremonial use of Incense we can find elsewhere. It may be 
best, then, now to correct a mistaken idea which is often held 
to militate against interpreting the passages as referring to 
Incense. 

It is said that the censer with chains for swinging in 
censing was unknown till the ninth century or thereabouts ; 
but this is a mistake. ’ 

The transition from a censer, hanging by chains to a beam, 
to a censer swung by chains in a man’s hand is so natural that 
it seems incredible to suppose that the vessel for Incense was 
exclusively confined to a shape like a spoon up till so late a 
date. As a matter of fact, archeological researches have 
proved the existence of a censer designed to be swung by the 
hand at a much earlier date than was formerly assigned ; and 
this evidence applies both to East and West. 

There is a Byzantine ivory bas relief at Trier representing 
the Solemn Translation of the Robe of the Blessed Virgin 
Mary to the chapel of the palace of Blacherne in the middle of 
the fifth century. At each window of the palace there is repre- 
sented a man standing swinging a censer out of the window.! 
For the purposes of comparison with this there is a sculpture 
of the VIth century in St. Mark’s, at Venice, which shows a 
similar censer of a pattern exactly like the modern manual 
censer,? but hung in an arch. The two forms were thus 
identical in shape. The Mosaics of Ravenna of the same cen- 


1 Rohault de Fleury La Messe V. 152, and pl. cdxiv, Also Kraus 
Geschichte des Chr. Kunt. 1. 501, 525. 2 [b. pl. cdxv. 


\ 


64 


tury supply two further examples of manual censers, one at 
San Vitale and one at San Apollinare in Classe; but it is 
noticeable that neither of these has a cover. Each 
mosaic represents the Consecration of the Church... The 


. Mannheim censer, the earliest now existing, is a beautiful 


specimen of early Christian bronze work. Fleury ascribes it 
to the sixth century, but Kraus to the fourth. There is no 
doubt then that the manual censer is as old as the fourth cen- 
tury, and possibly older. No doubt some of the early censers 
were held by handles and not hung by chains, either from 
the hand or from the roof, but this form was commoner in the 
East than in the West, and, as a matter of fact, it makes little 
difference to the ceremonial use of Incense, for either sort is 
alike available for censing, though the chains make a censer 
more convenient to handle. 


VIII. Having now freed our hands with regard to the cen- 
ser, and holding our judgment in suspense with regard to the 
meaning of the passage in St. Ambrose, we must try to 
trace out from the very scanty evidence which is available, 
what was the course of development in the use of Incense 
ceremonially in the Western Church. There seem to be two 
chief points of departure—there is the prophylactic value of 
Incense, which has from the first dictated its use at funerals, 
and there is the symbolical use, which is to develop in the free 
sphere of worship and in many ways to absorb the other. 
The use of Incense at funerals seems, however, to have 
been the starting point of a great deal. 

Documentary evidence from liturgical books only seriously 
begins at the close of the seventh, or the opening of the eighth 
century. 

At Rome, just as we have seen in the East, the use of 
Incense in procession is, next to the still use of Incense, 
perhaps the earliest liturgical use.2 It is possible that this 


1 Jb., and see a similar censer in Brit. Mus. MS. Tib. c. vi. figured 
there, and better in Westwood Facsimiles, pl. 46 (1868). 

* Possibly the use of Incense in visiting the sick is also very early ; all 
these three probably were in their origin sanitary precautions, or at least 


65 


arose out of the funeral procession ; the Incense was at first a 
sanitary precaution, but later was regarded as preparing the 
way by making a religious atmosphere.! The explanation 
given by Amalarius is not very convincing :— 


Portatur et thuribulum quod Christi corpus significat sicut 
scriptum est in eadem Apocalypsi: ‘Alius angelus venit et 
stetit ante altare habens thuribulum aureum (Apoc. viii.). 
Quod sic expositum est—in conspectu scilicet apparuit 
ecclesiz, factus ipse thuribulum ex quo Deus odorem suavitatis 
accepit et propitius factus est mundo.” 


Ecloga de officio misse. P.L. cv. 1317. 


But such explanations are not to be taken very seriously. 
Liturgical self-consciousness does not seem to have been 
awakened till the IXth century; till then ceremonial was in its 
infancy and was performed without any questions asked or 
reasons given. From that time forward it has always been 
more or less in dispute; but we are not concerned so much 
with the value of the explanations, which were (then as now) 
often very crude, but with the facts and history. 


1. The earliest Roman Ordo describes the use of Incense 
both in conducting the Pope on his way to the Stational Mass? 
(§ 4) and also thus at the service itself. 


regarded as prophylactic insome sense. Traces of the use in visiting the 
sick may be seen in a Rheims MS. of circa 1000, quoted by Menard (see 
P. L. \xxviii. 530), and in Martene De Eccl. Rit.. as well as in some forms of 
Benedictio incensi. e.g., the following from the Jumieges Missal and Leofric 
Missal :— 


Domine deus omnipotens cui. . . dignare domine respicere et 
benedicere hanc creaturam tuam incensi; ut omnes languores odorem 
ipsius sentientes effugiant et separentur, &c. 


Missal of Robert of Jumieges, H.B.S. 281 and Ixvii. Cp. Westm. Missal ii. 577. 
1 So Rupert of Deutz (1135) De div off. i. 36. Incensum bona 
opinionis signum locum ipsum aspergit in quo legendum est evangelium, 


? Compare the procession which escorted the newly ordained clergy 
after an ordination in Rome to their respective tituli cum cereostata et 
thymiamateriis. Ovdines of Si. Amand. Duchesne l.c., page 460. 


F 


66 


Statim ‘subdiaconus sequens tenens thymiamaterium 
aureum pro foribus ponat incénsum ut pergat ante pontificem. 

Tunc subdiaconus sequens cum thymiamaterio procedit 
ante ipsum, mittens incensum. 


Ordo 1., § 7,8. ‘“Mabillon M.J. ii. 7, 8. 
PL. (3xvil..Gat- 


Similarly before the Gospel,:— 


Procedunt ante ipsum [diaconum} duo _ subdiaconi 
regionarii levantes thymiamaterium de manu subdiaconi 
sequentis mittentes incensum. 


To2§ 1%~- Mabillonvg:- Pri. 942: 


2. The second Roman Ordo has the first passage in the 
same words, but has in place of the second :— 


Tunc ministri cum thymiamaterio et thuribulis non amplius 
ternis procedunt ante ipsum mittentes incensum. 


Ordo II. § 4. Mab. 43. P. L. 970. 


It has slight alterations only in the third passage: it adds 
there: ‘‘cum duobus thuribulis siue uno’’; and a little later 
on further directions are given as to the movement of the 
subdeacons at the ambo :—- 


Subdiaconi autem duo cum thuribulis ante evangelium in 
ambonem ex una parte ascendentes et ex altera parte statim 
descendentes redeunt stare ante gradum descensionis ambonis. 


Ordo, $8... Mab. 455 Palo 7t, gga 


Of still greater significance is a passage added in Ordo II. 
at § 9 :— 

Post lectum evangelium candelz in loco suo extinguuntur 
et ab episcopo Credo in Unum Deum cantatur, et thuribula per 


altaria portantur ; et postea ad nares hominum feruntur et 
per manum fumus ad os trahitur. 


At a later stage a further addition prescribes Incense at 


ee ee ee ea 2? oo 


= 


./ Ae 


+ 


67 


the offertory, when the oblations have been finally placed in 
order for consecration (the italics represent the additions) :— 


Post oblationem ponituy incensum super altare, et pontifex, 
inclinans se paululum ad altare, respicit scholam et annuit ut 
sileant, et convertit se ad populum dicens ‘* Ovate.” 


Ordomil 3759." Mabsaa7= Pale o79- 


The comparison of these two Ordines is of great interest in 
connexion with the development of the use of Incense in the 
West. This portion of Ordo I. is of purely Roman origin, and 
dates to the beginning of the VIIIth century. Ordo II. is 
based upon this, but does not represent the Roman use. It is 
clear that at Rome at the date of this part of Ordo I. incense 
was only used in connexion with a procession, 7.¢., at the 
approach to the Altar and on going to the ambo for the Gospel. 

Elsewhere Incense was used also in a rudimentary censing 
of persons at the Creed and of the oblations at the Offertory. 
The Ordo II. is not very much later than the first, and the use 
of Incense which it records may well be much older than the 
record. 


3. The Romans still in Amalarius’ time (c. 830) used no 
Incense at the oblation. So he notes expressly :— 


Post Evangelium non offerunt incensum super altare. 


Dewi, Ofse etolas tin. 1.1, CVs GG2: 


But, in his general account of the order of the Mass, he 
notes its use first at the approach to the Altar :— 


Prevenit in thuribulo thymiama quod significat Corpus 
Christi plenum odore bono. 
MOA pe Se lords CN GE, LOO. 


Then at the Gospel :— 


Deinde ponit episcopus thymiama in thuribulum super 
prunas ut suavem odorem excitet. Thuribulum Corpus 
Christi significat in quo est ignis scilicet spiritus sanctus, ex 


68 


quo bonus odor procedit, quod unusquisque electorum ad se 
vult rapere. _Idem odor bonam operationem de Christo exire 
demonstrat quam qui vivere vult in suum cor trajicit. ... 

Duo cerei qui portantur ante evangelium legem et prophetas 
designant precessisse evangelicam doctrinam : thuribulum vero 
opinionem bonarum virtutum procedentem de Christo. Ipsum 
thuribulum in tribunal ascendit ante evangelium ut ibi suavem 
odorem ministret. Christi enim bona opera precesserunt 
evangelicam doctrinam. 

Tb. itl, £6." OS ast 2 
And at the Oblation as well :— 


Deinde suscipit oblationes sacerdotum et diaconorum 
quibus licitum est accedere ad altare. . . . ex thuribulo quod 
superimponit post orationem, demonstrat per quem ei 
propitiari possit Deus videlicet per Dominum nostrum Jesum 
Christum cuius corpus designat thuribulum. 


Tb."ny 16... Loy TEsos 


In all this he is clearly following the line of Ordo II. 


4. Micrologus comments on this discrepancy of use in 
these terms :— 


Item Romanus Ordo precipit ut incensum semper 
preecedat Evangelium cum ad altare sive in ambonem 
portatur : non autem concedit ut oblatio in altari thurificetur : 
quod et Amalarius in prologo libri sui de officiis Romanos 
devitare fatetur, quamvis modo a pluribus immo pene ab 
omnibus usurpetur. 

Bernold of Constance (+ 1100) Micrologus, 
De Eccles. Observ., § 9. 


5. It is further emphasized by a Capitulum of Hincmar of 


Rheims given in 852, which is explicit as to the non-Roman 
custom :— 


Ut omnis presbyter thuribulum et incensum habeat, ut 
tempore quo Evangelium legitur et finito offertorio super 
oblationem incensum ut in morte videlicet Redemptoris ponat. 


I. vi. Hardouin v. 392. P. L. cxkv. 774. 


69 


6. Compare the opening Canon of the Synod held at 
Rouen in 878 :— 


Ut tempore quo evangelium legitur finitoque offertorio 
super oblationem incensum in mortem videlicet Redemptoris 
nostri ponatur decrevimus. 


Cap. 1. Hardouin vi. 205.1 


This evidence seems to point to the fact that the proces- 
sional use of Incense at Mass was specially Roman, and the 
censing of the oblations and clergy specially a Frankish cere- 
mony, adopted, as were many others, by the Romans only after 
a long and rigid resistance. 

The censing of the priest and people took place at this date 
after the Gospel, during the Creed, in connexion with the 
kissing of the Gospel-book, but it is not mentioned by the first 
Ordo, nor by Amalarius, nor by the Pseudo-Alcuin De Offciits, 
which merely quotes the second Roman Ordo at the Offertory 
and does not otherwise allude to Incense.” 

As to the censing of the Altar, the ceremony is not only not 
mentioned by the Ordines or by Amalarius, but the character 
of the directions given for the celebrant excludes it :— 


Pertransit pontifex in caput schole et in gradu superiore 
inclinato capite ad altare primo adorat Sancta, et stat semper 
inclinatus usque ad versum prophetalem, &c., &c. 


Onde ll.(4) 55 PL AREVII. 970: 


IX. The history of the ceremonial censing of the Altar 
must probably be traced along a very different line of evidence! 
We have already seen evidence for the use of Incense at 
funerals, and it is probably from this use (at least in part) that 
this particular form of the ceremonial use of Incense grew. In 
early days Altars were erected over the bodies of the saints. 


1 Bruns gives the date of this Council as 650 (Canones I1., 268. 320) ; 
but the earlier date is very improbable. See Hefele Conciliengeschichte 
iii, 96 (Freiburg i. B. 1877). 

2 See cap. 40. P. L. ci. 1252. The work is not earlier than the 
XIth century, and this chapter is really Remigius of Auxerre’s Evpositio 
Misse. 


70 


The consecration of a Church often coalesced with the transla- 
tion of the saint’s body there!; and this connexion between 
the Altar and the relics gained such vogue that in medieval 
times every Altar contained some relics enclosed in a sealed 
stone in the body of the erection. The consecration of a new 
Altar was thus modelled on a funeral service: it was natural 
to cense the bones of the saints or the relics lying under it, and 
this became one of the regular ceremonies of the consecratio 
altavis. 


1. The Gelasian Sacramentary, after providing for some 
Levitical anointing of the Altar, continues thus :— 


Et offeres incensum super Altave odovem suavissimum Domino. 
Benedictio Altaris. Prefatio consecrationis. 


Dei patris omnipotentis misericordiam dilectissimi fratres 
deprecemur ut hoc altare .... santificet ... . et spiritali 
placatus incenso precanti familie sue promptus exauditor 
adsistat. Per. 


Muratori, Liturg. Rom. Vet. i. 610. cf. il. 185. 


2. The later sacramentaries give much more detail and 
form various combinations of Gallican and Roman ceremonies : 
in Menard’s codex of the IXth century, after the sprinkling of 
the Altar and the Church, Incense was oftered upon the Altar 
and it was anointed with oil semper incensum in civcuitu ipsius 
altaris alto sacerdote faciente. Then after the anointing of the 
consecration crosses on the walls of the Church, faciens crucem 
imcenst super altave dictt Oremus; and collects and blessings 
follow. 

But all this preceded the actual bringing of the relics to be 
enclosed in the Altar; these were solemnly carried into the 
Church—cum cructbus et thuribulis et candelabris multisque lumin- 
avibus—and enshrined in the Altar.? 


1 Duchesne Origines du Culle, p. 388, 

2 Greg. Sacy. Ed. Menard, 149-152. P. L. xxviii. 157-160. See also 
Remigius of Auxerre’s Commentary (c. 900) on the Service. P. L. cxxxi. 
858-862. 


71 


In the Order of Consecration of a Church given in 
Muratori! the bringing in and enclosing of the relics is more 
elaborately done, and precedes the sprinkling and anointing of 
the Altar. Three grains of Incense are enclosed with the 
relics.2_ After the enclosing :— 


Postea deferant incensum. Et dum Episcopus cum eo factt crucem 
super altave dicat Antiphonam.?  Dirigatur Domine oratio mea 
sicut incensum in conspectu tuo. Antiphona. Ascendit fumus 
aromatum in conspectu domini de manu angeli. 


Then follows the anointing, and it is ordered (as above) :— 


Et semper sacerdos prepavatus faciat incensum per civcuitum 
altavis donec consecratio finiatur. 


Again, after the anointing of the consecration crosses on 
the walls :— 


Itevum autem offerat episcopus incensum super altave et cantat antt- 
phonam, 7Edificavit moyses altare Domino Deo. 


And after a Collect :— 


Hic ponat incensum im medio et im quatuoy angulis altaris et 
incendatuy et dicatury. Dirigatur oratio mea sicut incensum in 
conspectu tuo Domine V. Elevatio manuum mearum 
sacrificium vespertinum.° 


1 ii. 46, and cp. for the Altar ii. 494. 

2 Cp. the Metz Sacramentary in Duchesne, p. 468, and Ducanges. v. 
«“Incensum.” 

3 Dein faciat incensum accendi in quatuoy angulos et medio et dicat Anti- 
phonam, ii. 494. 

+ The rubrics of both these Sacramentaries, with regard to Incense, 
so far, derive from the Ovdo Romanus, which deals with the Consecration 
of a Church, as printed by Hittorp, De divinis eccl. cath. officiis, pp. 107-131 
(Cologne, 1568): the first preservessome features, and the second others : 
the prayers differ. 

5 Lit. Rom. Vet. ii. 479-484. This last provision is not in the Ordo 
Romanus above mentioned. The Ordines of St. Amand printed in 
Duchesne are not very full. and only mention Incense in the procession 
with the relics. Duchesne l.c., p. 461. 


72 


It seems possible here to distinguish clearly two uses of 
incense: the first is connected with the relics; they are 
brought in with incense, enclosed with incense, and then 
censed : this is all on the same line as the use at funerals: the 
second is simply connected with prayer; the incense is offered 
and burnt on the Altar to symbolize prayer.! 

It seems probable that the censing of the Altar at Mass 
was due, at least in part, to a repetition of these ceremonies : 
it is significant that the prayer used quando levantur veliquia, or 
on the way to bring the relics into Church (Aufer a nobis *), 
became the prayer of approach to the Altar at the beginning of 
Mass according to many uses.? 


3. The earliest evidence of censing the Altar or relics at 
Rome is in connexion with the Divine Office, not with Mass 
at all. The Liber Pontificalis records of Stephen V. (885-891 :— 


‘Cum in basilica beati Petri apostolorum principis ubi 
sacro ipse corpore requiescit cerneret nocturnis laudibus vix 
semel thumiamatis incensum offerri, instituit ut per singulas 
lectiones et responsoria adoleatur.”’ 


Liber Pontif., Ed. Duchesne, 11. 194. 


It is clear from this that some censing took place before 
Pope Stephen’s time, and possibly this was the purpose of 


1 This is so explained by Raban in his exposition of the ceremonies of 
the consecration of a Church. Quod vero tunc incensum a pontifice super 
altare ponitur significat puram super illud orationem esse debere. De 
Clevicorum institutione 11. 45 P. L. cvii. 359. 


2 Lit. Rom, Vet. li. 241, 479. 


5 The use of Incense in connexion with relics under other circum- 
stances than at the consecration of a Church is not uncommon, especially 
in the Translation of Relics in a procession which was in some sense a 
repetition of the funeral procession, or is indistinguishable from it. For 
example, in the life of St. Lupicinus (c. 480), Rapuit sanctum corpus et 
ferre coepit in feretro ad vicum Transaliacensem, dispositis in itinere 
psallentium turmis cum crucibus’ cereisque atque odore fragrantis 
thymiamatis. Gregory of Tours Vita Sancti Lupicini. P. L. \xxi. 1067. 


73 


the benefactions of incense cited above.! In any case this 
Passage seems to emphasize the argument for the connexion 
of the censing of relics with that of the Altar. 


4. It is equally clear that at Rome, at any rate, there was 
no ceremonial censing of the Altar at Mass till a much later date. 
We have found no trace of it in the Ovdines Romani or in the 
early Liturgists. There is no mention of it in the Ratoldus 
Codex of the Gregorian Sacramentary of the latter part of the 
Xth century; but in the Codex Tilianus, a French Ordo of 
the eleventh century, the following three directions? are given 
for censing at the Oftertory :— 


Postea incensum accipiens ponat in thuribulum dicens, Per 
intercessionem sancti Gabrielis, &c. 


Tunc ponat incensum super sacrificium et in civcwitu altaris dicat, 
Incensum istud, &c. 


Quando odov ewusdem incensi episcopo vel ceteris porrigituy unuse 
wisque dicat, Accendat in nobis Dominus ignem sui amoris et 
flammam zternz caritatis. 


Here it is clear that the censing of the persons has been 
transferred from the Creed to the Offertory, which, as we shall 
see, was the case in England also at a later period. 


5. John of Avranches, a writer of the same date (c. 1030), 
and also from North France, mentions the censing of persons 
after the Gospel, and says, with regard to the Offertory :— 


Sacerdos oblationem itacomponat ut ... sicque corporali 
cooperta. incensum desuper offerat et sic diacono prebeat: 
diaconus vero in circuitu altaris deferat, postea sacerdoti deinde 
ministro reddat ut clero populoque deferat. 


Joann. Abrincens, De. Off. Eccl., ed. Prevot, p. 20. 
Peel Cxvile 35,01 LEAVIN. 253, 


1 See p. 58, especially note 3. 
2In Menard. See PL. Ixxviii. 244 ff.; and for an account of the 
document, 20-22. 


74 


6. The VIth Roman Ovdo has as follows :— 


Sumat incensum a custode ecclesiz ponensque in thuri- 
bulum offerat illud altari, detque archidiacono. [lle vero post- 
quam hoc commendaverit acolyto eat in sedem suum. 


Ovdo Romanus VI.,§ 10. Mab. 74. P. L. Ixxviil. 993. 


7. The censing of the Altar is seen to be growing up in 
connexion with the oblation, but not yet to be fully developed. 
In the XIIth century, however, the censing is fully provided 
for, not at the oblation, but at the approach to the Altar, in 
the Gemma amme :— 


Episcopus ingrediens pacem clero porrigit 

deinde sanctuarium intrat inclinans coram altari orat confes- 
sionem faciens..... Post hoc duos sacerdotes osculatur 

. . . deinde ceteris ministris a dextra pacem dabit..... 
Altare et Evangelium osculatur ... . post hac thuribulum 
accipiens altare thurificat in figura angeli qui in Apocalypsi 
cum aureo thuribulo altari astiterat, &c..... deinde altare 
osculatur .... deinde Gloria in excelsis incipit et chorus 
concinit. 


Honorius of Autun Gemma Anime vii. P. L. clxxii. 546. 


Here is the definite censing of the Altar, but not followed 
by the censing of the priest. 
At the creed which follows the sermon :— 


Interim evangelium cum incenso per chorum defertur et 
singulis ad osculandum porrigitur. 


1b: 35V5, (PUL elaiasee 


There is no censing of persons, and the Incense is only 
regarded as an accompaniment of the Gospel Book. 

There is only the barest mention of the censing of the 
oblations.! 

These passages seem to show in outline the gradual growth 


1c, xl, ib. 556 and cp. Rupert, De Div. Off, i. 29, 36. 


7o 


of the ceremonial censing of the Altar. At the approach to 
the Altar it formed a natural appendix to the processional 
censing at the entry of the clergy. At the Offertory it seems 
to have grown out of the censing of the oblations, and as the 
oblations themselves might include Incense it was a very 
natural growth that some of the Incense offered should at once 
be burnt upon the Altar at the Offertory. The censing in 
ccuitu by the deacon especially seems to derive from the 
Consecratio altaris. 


X. It will be best, before coming to the later medizval 
practice, to notice one or two other interesting uses of Incense. 
There is continual use on the old lines in procession, both 
before Mass and at other times. 

It was also used in connexion with other benedictions 
besides the consecration of an Altar, ¢.g. in connexion with 
the blessing of a cross.! Its use in connexion with the 
Paschal candle is very ancient,? though it is said to be due to 
a mistake, and it is not a Roman custom; also in the conse- 
cration of the Holy Oils andat the Maundy on Maundy Thurs- 
day.? The Roman ceremony analogous to the Paschal candle was 
the making and distribution of distribution of lambs of wax, 
and in connexion with them Incense was burnt ad suffumi- 
gandum in domibus suis pro quacunque tribulatione.4 At the solemn 
baptisms of Easter Eve Incense was burnt in procession,°® and 
in the procession of Easter Day.® In later days this use was 
considerably extended until some sort of censing became finally 
an integral part of most of the ceremonial blessings. 

We have already seen certain evidence of the use of 
Incense in England. No doubt in this, as in other respects, 
the English Church had much the same customs as elsewhere ; 
but it is worth while to glance in passing at the use of Incense 


1 Muratori, Lit, Rom. Vet,, ii. 504. 

2 Gelasian Sacramentary, Muratori, 1. 565 

3 Ovdo Romanus in Hittorp, De div. Off., pp. 59, 62 (Cologne, 1568). 
4 1b, pp. 72, 81. Amalarius. De Eccl. Off., i. 17. 

5 Ib, pp. 73» 76; 77- 

* Ib. pp. 77-79: 


76 


made by Abbat Ceolfrid (¢. 716). On his leaving for Rome 
after Mass :— 


Conveniunt omnes in ecclesiam beati Petri; ipse, thure 
incenso et dicta oratione ad altare, pacem dat omnibus stans 
in gradibus turribulum habens in manu. 


Beda Historia Abbatum, ii. 17. Opera Hist., Ed. 
Plummer, 1. 382. 


Compare with this the anonymous Historia Abbatum, § 25 
(tb. i. 396), which gives a fuller account :— 


Vocat omnes in ecclesiam beati Petri, rogat pro se orare, 
dicit et ipse orationem, accendit thymiama habensque in 
manu turribulum consistit in gradibus ubi legere consuerat, 
dat osculum plurimis, nam ne omnibus luctu et suo et ipsorum 
prepeditur. Egreditur cum turribulo ad oratorium beati 
Laurentii Martyris quod est in dormitorio fratrum, sequuntur 
et ipsi cantantes antiphonam de propheta ‘‘ Via iustorum recta 
facta est et iter sanctorum preparatum est,” et ‘‘ Ambulantes 
de uirtute in uirtutem,” adiuncto et psalmo sexagesimo sexto 
‘¢ Deus misereatur nobis... .’’ Et ibi incenso thure, exiens 
rursum adloquitur omnes ut pacem invicem seruent..... 
Completa allocutione rursus adsumpta antiphona cum psalmo 
memorato egrediuntur ad fluvium, lugubre carmine patrem 
utpote iam decessurum deducentes, itidemque singulis osculum 
pacis dat, intercepto saepius cantu pre lacrimis: et, dicta in 
litore oratione, ascendit nauem, residet in prora, sederunt 
iuxta diacones, unus crucem quam fecerat auream alter czereas 
manu tenens ardentes. 


This seems to show that liberty existed for other uses of 
Incense than those which normally formed part of the service. 


XI. We turn now to England to see the directions for 
censing at Mass in the later periods of the Middle Ages. 
First we have the following directions given by Archbishop 
Lanfranc to the Benedictine Order :— 


1. Sacerdos ingrediatur ad altare ferens missale manibus 


Git 


suis praecedentibus tribus conversis cum candelabris et thuri- 
bulo, subdiacono post eos cum textu, subdiaconum sequente 
diacono, et posito missali super altare faciat orationem sup- 
pliciter inclinatus. . . . Qua [confessione] facta, imposito a 
sacerdote thure in thuribulo tribuat diaconus sacerdoti thuri- 
bulum: sacerdos incenset altare ante et desuper reddatque 
diacono: diaconus incenset utraque altaris latera et altare 
matutinale et sic reddat converso qui deferens in chorum 
offerat primum cantori et ipsis qui cum eo sunt, dehinc in 
dextro choro omnibus per ordinem, et sic in sinistro, deinde 


infirmis qui extra chorum sunt. ... 

Ad evangelium dum canitur offerenda vel versus offerendae 
conversus afferat thuribulum cum acerra cantori. . . . cantor 
vero. . . . ponat incensum in thuribulo et mittat diacono ad 


altare et diaconus tribuat sacerdoti. 


The censing at the Gospel and the offertory seem to be 
run into one; but they evidently were distinct, for when a 
Bishop was present :— 


Ad ipsum deferatur thuribulum cum acerra ad introitum et 
ante Evangelium a diacono et converso, post offerendam a 


cantore et converso. 
Lanfranc, Decreta pro O. S. B., § xi. 


PL. dl. 479. 


At the beginning of the XIIIth century we have what is at 
once the fullest and the most authoritative of English directions 
previous to the Reformation as to the use of Incense at Mass 
in the Sarum Consuetudinary (c. 1210); this is supplemented 
by the directions given in the Customary (XIVth cent.), which 
later were incorporated as Rubric into the Mass book.1 


1. As to the entry (Customary only) :— 


Executor cum suis ministris presbiterium intret et ad 
altare ordinatim accedant, primo ceroferarii duo pariter 
incedentes deinde turribularius, post eum subdiaconus, exinde 
diaconus et post eum sacerdos. 


1 Use of Sarum, cap. xxxix. 66, pp. 61-105 (Cambridge, 1898). 


78 


2. At the approach (Consuetudinary § 6) :— 


Post humiliacionem uero sacerdotis ad altare factam ipsum 
altare sacerdos thurificet diaconi ministerio; deinde ab ipso 
diacono ipse sacerdos thurificetur. 


The Customary gives fuller details :— 


Deinde ponat diaconus thus in turribulum et dicat diaconus 
prius sacerdoti Benedicite. Sacerdos dicat Dominus. Ab tpso. &c. 
Tunc diaconus ei turribulum tradens deosculetur manum elius, 
et ipse sacerdos thurificet medium et utrumque cornu 
altaris; deinde ab ipso diacono ipse sacerdos thurificetur. § 6. 


3. At the Gospel (Consuetudinary § 19):— 


Dum prosa canitur diaconus ipse altare thurificet. Deinde, 
. ... accepto texto evangeliorum, et data ei humiliato bene- 
diccione, et ceroferariis et thuribulo precedente, subdiacono 
librum leccionis evangelice deferente per medium chori ad 


pulpitum accedat .... $22. Post incepcionem Credo in 
unum sacerdos ipse ministerio diaconi thurificetur et postea 
ministerio subdiaconi textum sacerdos deosculetur. Quo 


peracto chorus ministerio pueri more solito incensetur. 


In the Customary the censing at the Kissing of the Gospels 
is omitted, but the earlier censing is more fully described :— 


Diaconus antequam accedat ad evangelium pronunciandum 
thurificet medium altaris tantum. Nunquam enim thurificet 
lectrinum neque ad missam neque ad matutinas ante pro- 
nunciacionem evangelii. . . . procedat diaconus per medium 
chori.... ad pulpitum accedat cum ceroferario et thuri- 
bulario precedente. . . . Et cum ad locum legendi pervenerit 


. .. thuribularius stet post diaconum ad eum conversus. 
§ 19, 20. 


3. At the Offertory (Consuetudinary, § 24) :— 

Postea ordinato sacrificio et debito modo disposito, sacerdos 
sacrificium ministerio diaconi ter in signum crucis thurificet, 
deinde ter in circuitu, postea ex utraque parte sacrificii. 
§ 25. Quo peracto sacerdos manus abluat ministerio subdiaconi 
et aliorum ministrorum, diacono interim ipsum altare in 
sinistro cornu incensante et reliquias more solito in circuitu. 


79 


The Customary gives much fuller directions § 24 :— 


Hoc peracto accipiat thuribulum a diacono et thurificet 
sacrificium videlicet ultra ter signum crucis faciens et ter in 
circuitu calicis et ex utraque parte calicis et sacrificii. Deinde 
locum inter se et altare (disponat) et dum thurificet dicat 
Divigatuy domine, &c. Postea thurificetur ipse sacerdos ab 
ipso diacono et subdiaconus deferat ei textum deosculandum. 
Deinde acolytus thurificet chorum (in order) . . . . ita 
quod ipse puer singulos clericos incensando illis inclinet sub- 
sequente eo subdiacono cum textu ab omnibus deosculando. 
Si episcopus celebraverit et duplex festum fuerit duo veniunt 
cum thuribulo et duo diaconi cum duobus textibus vel reliquiis. 

Si presens fuerit episcopus et non exequatur officium, 
diaconus . . . . post lectum evangelium per episcopum 
transeundo eum primum incensabit et postea subdiaconus 
fextiim. « . . porrigat. 

Quando vero non. dicitur Credo . .. . thurificet (ae., 
sacerdos) sacrificlum more solito sed chorus non thurificetur. 
Nunquam enim thurificetur chorus post evangelium ad missam 
nisi quando dicitur Credo in unum sed tunc semper. 

§ 25. Hiis ita peractis eat sacerdos ad dextrum cornu 
altaris et abluat manus . . . . diacono interim ipsum altare in 
sinistro cornu thurificante et reliquias more solito in circuita. 


It seems that the censing of the celebrant and choir was 
transferred from the time of the Creed to the time following the 
censing of the oblations in the interval between the date of the 
Consuetudinary and that of the Customary : but the earlier use 
was continued in the case of a Bishop being present : and this 
censing was still governed by the consideration whether the 
Creed was said or no even after it had been dissociated from 
the Creed. 

The actual censing of the Altar is described once for all in 
full detail in connexion with Evensong, and then only briefly 
at Mass. The Consuetudinary lays down (xxvil. § 4) :— 


Deinde sacerdos ponat thus in thuribulo benedicendo et 
procedat ad altare; et facta genuflexione ante altare illud 
incenset, primo in medio deinde in dextera parte postea in 


80 


sinistra : exinde imaginem beate marie et postea arcam in qua 
continentur reliquiz: deinde thurificando altare circumeat. 

To this description the Customary adds (i.) the details of 
blessing, (ii.) that the priest should kiss the altar step at the 
genuflexion, (iii.) that it is the patron saint whose image is 
censed, and (iv.) that the censing in the case of the middle! and 
each side of the Altar and of the image of the patron is to be a 
triple censing. Cap. 23 § 2, and cap. 37 § 1. (pp. 114, 183). 

These directions are those which formed the rubrics of the 
printed Sarum Service Books, and they may therefore be taken 
to represent the use of Incense throughout the greater part of 
England in the second year of King Edward VIth. 

There is, however, some evidence that Incense was also 
used at the Consecration. 

At Chichester Cathedral a special benefaction existed to 
maintain the incense at this point: a document dealing with it 
of the date 1304 is cited by Mackenzie Walcott thus :— 


Consensus Abbatis Laurentii et Conventus de Ponte 
Roberti super assignatione C.s. ad sustentationem duorum 
clericorum ad thurificandum Corpus Christi in elevatione 
ejusdem singulis diebus ad magnum altare cum summam 
missam ibidem celebrare contigerit. 

Archeologia, xlv. 212. 


There is no reason to suppose that this was unique : in fact 
this identical use is prescribed in the Roman ceremonial, and 
this evidence seems to show that it was one of the customs 
which, though not laid down in rubrics, were in fact in common 
vogue. 


XII. With regard to the use of Incense in the Divine 
Office we have already had the testimony of St. Silvia and the 
evidence from Rome in the IXth century. To the same 
period belongs the information of Amalarius. In speaking of 
the verse Dirigatur ovatio mea sicut incensum at Evensong he says :— 


Cum ipso versu offertur Incensum quod Dominus precepit 
offerri de quo scriptum est in libro Exodi (quoting Ex. xxx.). 


1 One MS. adds a second censing of the middle of the Altar. 


81 


. ... Intendat summus sacerdos qui vicem tenet Aaron in 
ecclesia quis debeat incensum offerre Domino super altare. 
Post hoc sequitur hymnus Sancte Marie. 


Amalarius, De Eccl. Off, iv. 7. 


There is no mention of Incense at Nocturns nor at Bene- 
dictus ; nor is the above note with regard to the use at Evensong 
repeated in the parallel passage in De Ord. Antiph., 6. So 
that it would seem dangerous to argue from silence here. But 
on the other hand it is to be noted that Rabanus Maurus only 
speaks of Evensong as the time when the Jews offered Incense, 
and says nothing of any Christian offering of Incense at the 
time ;1 this suggests that Amalarius’ language may after all 
only be figurative. 

The literal interpretation is, however, confirmed by a 
passage in John of Avranches :— 


Versu dicto hymnus Sancte Marie ... . dominice 
incarnationis memoriam .. . . nobis reducit. Incipiente 
versus} juxta quod Dominus precepit Moysi incensum super 
altare a sacerdote offertur. 


DOW SEC, DRO ule. CXLVI sO: 


This represents the use of Rouen at the time of the Norman 
conquest; but it is noticeable that here the verse spoken of is 
not the Dirigatur ovatio, as in Amalarius, but the opening verse 
of the Magnificat ; for John of Avranches, while keeping to the 
language of Amalarius, has altered the sense. This is made 
more clear by the parallel passage with regard to Benedictus :— 


Versu quoque excitati hymnum Zachariae concinimus in 
quo... . versuincepto, juxta quod Dominus Moysi precepit 
sacerdos incensum super altare adolebit. 


105 De LOy Col s3 1. 


On Christmas Day :— 


Antiphona cum trina repetitione super Magnificat can- 
tetur, duobus thuribulis altare incensetur. Ad matutinum 


1 De inst., cler., ii. 7. 


82 


. in secundo quinto et octavo [sc. responsorio] et ad 
Te Deum laudamus sed et ad Benedictus altare incensetur. ... . 
Tria Evangelia in cappis incenso et candelabris preecedentibus 
pronuntientur. 


Tbs pr33, col. 20. 


Again at the Mattins of St. Stephen’s Day :— 


Evangelium pronunciet diaconus dalmaticatus, thymiama- 
terio et cereis pracedentibus. Duo diaconi in dalmaticis 
chorum regant qui altare incensando Te Dewm incipiant. 


Lop 35 Cal tat. 


At Easter :— 


Quo peracto [sc. officio sepulchri] Te Dewm laudamus altari 
incensato cantetur et post unumquemque responsorium in- 
censetur. 


Lb. ps b5,-Cols sae 


This shews that the use of Incense at Magmificat and 
Benedictus as well as Te Deum and in the various Nocturns on 
great days was in full vogue in the XIth century in France at 
any rate. The first of these seems to have grown out of the 
Versicle Divigatuy ovatio, &c., while the last carries us back 
to Pope Stephen V. and the quasi-funereal censing of the tombs 
of the martyrs. 

When we turn to England we find, in the Xth century a 
passage which presupposes at the least a part of this system of 
censing. The Regularis Concordia notes incidentally with regard 
to Holy Innocents’ Day, which always had a disputed 
character, half festal and half penitential :— 


Ad matutinas vero .... licet Te Deum laudamus non 
canatur et evangelium minime festivo more legatur, cereus 
tamen accendatur et signa pulsentur omnia et thuribulum 
turificando deportetur. 


Dugdale, Monasticon 1. xxxv. (London, 1846). 


838 


This document represents the practice agreed upon among 
the various monastic bodies in St. Ethelwold’s Benedictine 
Reform movement at the end of the Xth century. 

At Mattins of Easter Day there followed after the third 
Respond the ceremony of the Three Maries at the Sepulchre, 
in which Incense is mentioned :— 


Dumque tertium percelebratur responsorium residui tres 
succedant, omnes quidem cappis induti, turribula cum insensu 
manibus gestantes .... ad _ similitudinem .... mulierum 
cum aromatibus venientium .... &c. 


Tb. xl. 


But this seems to be a special use of Incense rather than 
the customary censing during the nocturn on a festival. 

There seems to be no evidence available of the custom of 
English secular Churches in Anglo-Saxon times, and 
the earliest evidence available in Norman times is again 
Benedictine, vzz., that of Archbishop Lanfranc in his statutes 
for the Benedictine Order. The evidence testifies to the same 
system of censing and carried out with considerable elabora- 
tion :— 


Ad Benedictus sacerdos in alba incenset altaria. 


Lanfranc, Decreta pro O.S.B.ii. P. L. cl., 448. 


Again, on Christmas Eve (Jb. 450) the same order is given : 
but at Christmas Day :— 


In nocte Dominice nativitatis omnia signa primum 
pulsentur; ad invitatorium quatuor fratres in cappis. In 
unoquoque nocturno ad terciam lectionem duo sacerdotes capis 
induti duo thuribula circumferant, primo duobus altaribus 
maiori et matutinali, dehinc fratribus in choro sedentibus. (/d.) 


Again, at Easter :— 


Ad lectiones circumferantur thuribula sicut in die Dominicze 
Nativitatis institutum est. Ib., § v. 468. 


84 


Later on a comprehensive direction is given as to the 
censing at Magnificat on the five chief festivals :— 


Antiphona ad Magnificat ter dicatur : abbas et prior cappis 
induti incensent utraque presbyterii altaria ante et desuper 
utrique simul, singuli singula latera. Parati sint duo alil 
sacerdotes hebdomadarii, scilicet maioris missae et minoris, qui 
thuribula de eorum manibus accipiant et hinc et inde per 
altaria que extra sunt circumferant : qui revertentes in chorum 
abbati prius, priori postea ferant, post eis qui responsorium 
cantaverunt, non ambo simul sed unus hinc et alter inde: 
dehinc duo conversi in albis ceteris fratribus. Abbati de libro 
serviat qui thuribulum de eius manu accepit. 


“1b. & Vi e732 


At Mattins there is the censing during the Nocturns :— 


In tribus nocturnis dum legitur tercia lectio duo sacerdotes 
cappis induti incensent altaria maius et minus: dehinc ferant 
abbati et priori et caeteris fratribus per ordinem. (Jb.) 


At Lauds the directions are analogous to those of the 
previous Evensong. At greater festivals of the second class 
Incense was used at Magnisicat and Benedictus :— 


Duo sacerdotes cappis induti ad thuribula sicut superius de 
precipuis festivitatibus dictum est. § viii. 475. 


Antiphona ad Benedictus bis dicatur et thuribula similiter 
circumferantur. Jb. 


At festivals of the third class :— 


Sacerdos indutus cappa incenset altaria, conversus sit in 
albaesulxnd 7S. 


From this we pass on as before to summarize the provisions 
of the Sarum Consu:tudinary. 


85 


The ordinary Sunday method of censing the altar has 
been already given (pp. 79, 80): that done :— 


Sacerdos accedat ad extremum gradum ante altare et ad 
altare se inclinet: et precedentibus ceroferariis et thuribulo 
installo huic officio deputato se recipiat. Deinde puer ipsum 
sacerdotem ibidem incenset. 


Consuet. Xxvil. 4, xxvill. 1 (Use of Sarum, p. 44). 


And the censing of the choir followed. 


On the twelve greatest days more was done than on 
Sundays or lesser double feasts :— 


Omnia altaria ecclesiz ad primas vesperas tantum incensa- 
buntur: ad matutinas vero et ad secundas vesperas nisi 
tantum autenticum altare et chorus similiter..... 

Et quandocunque nouem lecciones .... contigerint, 
ad matutinas scilicet ad secundam ad quintam et ad octavam 
leccionem incensetur autenticum altare et chorus similiter ab 
uno sacerdote . .. . diacono ei ministrante: ad Te Deum 
laudamus simili modo fiat. 

In ceteris autem festis duplicibus per annum ad utrasque 
uesperas et ad matutinas non incensatur nisi altare principale 
tantum et chorus: similiter in singulis nocturnis ad matutinas 
et ad Te Deum audamus non incensatur [nisi] altare neque [et] 


chorus. 
Consuet. XXi. 2. Use of Sarum, pp. 31, 32. 


Later on the ceremonial of the censing is more fully 
described.! There was less of ceremony on lesser days, but 
the censing took place at Magmficat, at Te Deum (or the 
repetition of the ninth respond when there was no Te Deum), 
and at Benedictus on all Sundays and all festivals except those of 
the lowest class.? 

These are the regulations that were in force in the Second 
Year of Edward VI., and were to a greater or less extent 
incorporated into the Rubrics of the later Latin Service 


Books. 


11b., pp. 113-117, 121-123. 2 1b., pp. 97, 183-187 


86 


The history of the use of Incense at the Eucharist and the 
Divine Office presents a good many difficulties, and still more 
gaps; but the result finally arrived at by the time to which 
reference is made in the Prayer Book is in both cases clear. In 
considering the bearing of this on the use of Incense at the 
present time, with regard to the Eucharist there is no 
difficulty caused by the transition from the Latin to the Eng- 
lish Service, because the form of the Service, so far as it con- 
cerns Incense, remains so much the same; but, in the case of 
the Divine Office, there is need of some modification, because 
of the change involved in the transition from the Latin Even- 
song, and the still more radical change involved in passing 
from the old Service of Nocturns with Lauds to the English 
Mattins. But it is only necessary to point out here that, in 
both cases, the use of Incense which was customary in the 
second year of Edward VI. is beyond all doubt or question, 
and that, whatever history lies behind, it is this only that is 
of practical importance and legal value. 


W. HY FRERE: 


Pee IN Die BB: 


ONG EHE USE OF INCENSE IN THE ORTHODOX 
BASTERN GHURCH. 


In the Orthodox Eastern Church Incense is used eight times 
(always) during the Liturgy, once during Vespers (twice, or 
three times, on Sundays and Festivals), and twice at Matins 
(four times on Sundays and Festivals). While the exact 
method of its use often differs in detail (¢.g., it may never be 
administered by anyone who is not at least in deacon’s orders), 
it is an interesting fact that at each point of the service where 
its use is most confidently claimed for the English Church— 
immediately before the commencement of the Liturgy, before 
the reading of the Gospel, at the placing of the oblations upon 
the Altar, at Magmificat and Benedictus, and in Processions, there 
is a corresponding use of Incense in the Eastern rite. The 
circumstances, however, differ in detail. The censing in the 
East which corresponds with that of the Approach to the Altar 
is done by the Deacon and not by the Priest. As soon as the 
Proskomide is finished, the Priest, after censing the oblations 
for the last time on the table of the Prothesis, gives the censer 
to the Deacon, who, after himself censing the Oblations, censes 
the Altar, and then the whole church, the icons and people, and 
then the Altar again; after which the Deacon and the Priest 
say (secret) short prayers of preparation, including the beauti- 
ful prayer to the Holy Spirit with which every office com- 
mences, and which presents a striking parallel to our Collect 
for Purity :— 

‘“‘O heavenly King, the Comforter, Who art in all places 
and fillest all things, come [hou, and dwell within us, and 
cleanse us from all that defileth, and save, O blessed One, our 


souls.” 


88 


At the Gospel the censing, according to the directions of 
the rubrics, should take place during the Alleluia, but owing to 
the fact that the verses to the Alleluia (though in the books) 
are almost universally omitted, as a matter of fact it always 
takes place during the reading of the Epistle ; the Deacon, just 
as at Sarum, censes not the analogion, or lectern, but the Altar 
with the Book of the Gospels lying on it, and then the sanc- 
tuary, the clergy in choir, the icons, the choir, and the people ; 
he does not, however, go down into the nave for this. 

At the Offertory the censing of the Altar, choir, and 
people is done by the Deacon immediately before the Great 
Entrance, while the oblation is censed by the Priest with three 
swings, as soon as it is placed on the Altar. 

There is no censing at the Consecration, but after the Con- 
secration, during the Commemoration of the Mother of God 
and of the Saints the Holy Sacrament is censed. This is of 
course in allusion to the passage in the Apocalypse about the 
smoke of the Incense ascending before God with the prayers 
of the saints. 

In the East Magnificat is sung at Matins, where, together 
with Benedictus, it forms the ninth ‘ Ode ” or Scripture canticle. 
The whole church is censed at this point, beginning with the 
Altar. The daily censing at Vespers takes place at the Psalm 
Képie éxéxpaga, which practically (although not liturgically per- 
haps) occupies the place of the Western Magnificat. It is 
the verse ‘‘Let my prayer be set forth in Thy sight as the 
Incense,”’ which obviously suggests this custom. 

It will be seen from the above, that, with the exception of 
the censing which takes place after the Consecration, the choir 
and the people are censed at all the points which have been 
mentioned, as well as at some other points in the Eastern 
services for which no parallel is to be found in the Western 
service books. In the West, on the contrary, however often 
Incense is prescribed, the censing of the choir and people seems 
always to have been confined to one occasion in each service. 
But however much the actual practice may differ in detail, it 
may fairly be said that the principles underlying its use are the 
same in East and West. 


W. J. BIRKBECK. 


db y, 
a a «Bild oa, of), Kn 


eS eee ey). ee A ee 


89 


MPPENDEX “C: 


THE THEOLOGICAL VALUE OF INCENSE. 


BURST “CREATISE. 


By the Rev. H. R. Percivar, Rector of the Church of the 
Evangelists, Philadelphia, U.S.A. 


IPARGoe 
THE MEANING OF INCENSE. 


The burning of Incense seems to have had two distinct 
meanings, as used in the Christian Church, the meaning 
varying in accordance with the source from which the practice 
was taken. 


(A) A Mark of Respect to that before which it was burned. 


The Ancient Greeks and Romans burned Incense before 
their gods and before the likenesses of the Emperor in token of 
veneration and high regard. This heathen use of Incense was 
in a standing vessel (the tuvibulum) which was really a 
moveable grate, or more ordinarily a stationary altar (ava). A 
pinch of frankincense was taken out of the aceyyva and was 
thrown upon the coals. Incense was wont to be burned 
before the representations of the Emperors in heathen times, 
as a mark of respect, and this was carried over into the 
Christian days as Dr. Doellinger remarks in his ‘“ History of 
the Church” (Eng. tr., Vol. III., p. 55) and to this reference 
is made by the Bishop Theodosius, who had belonged to the 
Iconoclasts, but who made his submission at the second 


90 


Nicene Synod, (Labbe Concilia, viii. 705c. Venice, 1729,) where 
he expressly says that even at that late date the custom had still 
survived, and that when the Lawvata et iconae of the Emperor 
were sent to any city or town, the people went out to receive 
them ‘with lights and incense,” and argues that ‘‘it was 
surely not the tablet covered with wax, but the Emperor him- 
self, that was thus honoured.” (On the subject of these 
lauvata, cf. Du Cange, Gloss.) 

It may well be supposed that this idea of marking the 
respect one bears towards some person or thing by burning 
Incense before him or it was the origin, not only of the Incense 
offered to the Christian Emperors and their likenesses, and of 
that which was offered in the path of the heathen victor at his 
triumph, but also of the offering of Incense before images, altars, 
the book of the Holy Gospels, and other objects and persons 
deemed by the early Christians worthy of special respect. In 
this connection, it may not be amiss to remark that no cere- 
monial act has any inherent meaning, its meaning being entirely 
dependent upon the intention with which it is performed. The 
same outward ceremonial act may mean different things, or 
different grades of the same thing. It is a complete mistake 
to suppose that the burning of Incense necessarily is an act of 
Divine worship, or has any necessary connection with sacrifice. 
As has just been pointed out, it may be nothing more than an 
act of civil and political respect. The removal of the hat in 
Church and at the meeting of a friend or of a funeral is a 
precisely similar case. This heathen-derived idea of Incense 
seems to have been sanctified by the early Church, and by her 
to have been incorporated into her worship, and we find this 
idea expressed in the ordinary form for blessing Incense in the 
West—“ Mayest thou be blessed by Him in Whose honour 
thou art to be burned.” 


(B) The mystical setting forth of Prayer. 


But there was a deeper meaning attached to the burning 
of Incense among God’s chosen people than was ever found 
among the heathen. To the Jews the smoke of the Incense 
was the sweet savour of prayer rising up before the Most 


a ee 


91 


High. «Let my prayer be set forth in Thy sight as: the 
Incense.” There is no need to cite other passages to the same 
purpose. The Jews not only knew that the Incense they 
offered set forth the power of prayer in general, but above all 
they connected it with that all-availing intercession which was 
to be made by the promised Messiah to whom all their cere- 
monies pointed. (On this, see the Jewish Commentators. 
Ebrard has some good remarks on this head.) And yet this 
ceremony of burning Incense before God was peculiar and 
different from most of their rites. All those other rites would 
be fulfilled and vanish away when Christ was come, but this 
rite and the “‘ pure Mincha,” with which it was so intimately 
connected, should continue on in the Gospel Days. The 
blood of circumcision would no more be shed, the blood of the 
beast would no more be poured forth, but from East to West 
among the Gentiles the pure Mincha would be offered to God’s 
Name with the smoke of the Incense. No unbiassed commen- 
tator can question the statement that if the ‘‘ pure offering” is 
material and not merely symbolical, namely, the material 
offering of the elements of Holy Eucharist, then, too, the 
Incense must be material; nor is it possible to explain away 
the material character of the Mincha by interpreting ‘‘pure”’ to 
mean immaterial, as our profoundly learned Joseph Mede in 
commentating on this text well notes. He says that if ‘‘pure”’ 
be understood as meaning that it was ‘‘a@vtws dvec@u, to be 
sacrificed without sacrificing rites” .... “ it would make 
the literal sense of our prophet to be absurd, and to say ‘in 
every place Incense is offered to My Name, and an offering 
without Incense.’ And yet this would be the literal meaning 
if ‘ pure’ here signified without Incense.” (Book II., page 358, 
fourth edition, 1877.) 

(It should be noted that the word ‘“‘ Incense’ does not occur 
at all in this passage in the Roman Catholic Vulgate, but that 
version is undoubtedly incorrect here, the true meaning being 
found in the Septuagint.) 

It would seem then that the use of Incense in the Christian 
Church, if not directly pre-ordained by Almighty God, is at 
least most agreeable to the Holy Scriptures ; and as it has been 
n vogue in the whole Church from time immemorial, it would 


92 


ssem that it could hardly properly be laid aside even by the 
direct, clear, and unequivocal action of a particular Church, 
unless, indeed, it had become so associated with false doctrine 
as to be perilous to the purity of the faith of the people. 

There seems to be only one more point in this connection to 
dwell upon. In the Jewish Church, besides the Altar of 
Incense, and the little cups of Incense on the top of the piles of 
Shewbread, censers carried in the hand were in constant use. 
Everyone will remember the case of Korah. Also, there was 
a censer, which on the great day of Atonement, the high Priest 
took with him into the Holy of Hollies. 

This method of using Incense in a swinging vessel is 
that most commonly mentioned in the New Testament, and 
is practically the only one now known to the Church of God.! 


Part II. 


THE DOCTRINAL MEANING OF THE CENSINGS 
PRACTISED: BY THE “CATHOLMG CHU Cr 


WE come now to the consideration of the theological meaning 
to be attached to the censings of persons and things, as 
practised by the Christian Church from the earliest times. I 
do not think it is necessary to set down all the mystical 
meanings assigned to the use of Incense by the various 
Liturgical and Ritual writers. Their works are perfectly 
accessible, and can be examined by anyone, although no doubt 
theré are many true and useful meanings to be attached to 
this ceremony of the Church, but I shall endeavour to arrive 
at one general underlying principle. This principle has been 
rather culled from many sources and digested, than found 


1In the Orthodox Eastern Church, before the commencement of 
Mattins at midnight on Easter Day, Incense is burnt in two standing 
vessels, one in the centre of the nave, the other behind the iconostasion, in 
order that when the Resurrection is proclaimed the whole church may be 
filled with the sweet odour of frankincense. This, however, is the only 
occasion on which it is so burnt 


bil i 


Cot Le 


93 


clearly set forth in any one writer, but yet it would seem to be 
none the less sound on this account. To set forth, then, the 
matter in a word, it may be said that—Whatever was 
sprinkled or touched with blood in the Old Law, to show the 
need of a dying Redeemer to come, is, under the New Law, 
censed, to show that there is no more any need of a fresh 
sacrifice for sin, that the sacrifice set forth in type and figure 
by the sacrifices of the Law has been offered by Christ, once 
for all (@rat), « A full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, 
and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world”; that that 
sacrifice needs no repetition, that nothing can be added to it, 
and that all that now is needed is that we, who are still with- 
out the veil and yet parts of the mystical Body of the Eternal 
Victim, that we, together with our prayers, as a sweet smelling 
savour, should be gathered in one, and enfolded in His all 
prevailing intercession, which, as our Great High Priest, He 
offers, ‘‘ through His Blood” on the Heavenly Altar. This 
seems to be the view held by St. Thomas Aquinas (III., 83, v. 
Ad. 2), ‘‘ The offering of Incense represents the effect of grace, 
of which Christ (as of a sweet savour) is full ; and which from 
Christ is derived to the faithful by the office of the ministry ; 
and therefore, when the Altar by which Christ is signified 
has been censed on every side, all the people are censed in 
order.” 

Of course the bestowal of grace and the Lord’s intercession 
are essentially the same, as having their source in the same 
blood-shedding of the Immaculate Lamb. A clearer and more 
profound statement I find in Smith’s “ Dictionary of the 
Bible”; ‘‘ Looking upon Incense in connection with the other 
ceremonial observances of the Mosaic ritual, it would rather 
seem to be symbolical, not of prayer itself, but of that which 
makes prayer acceptable, the intercession of Christ.” 

In the Ninth Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews is set 
forth the whole rationale of the ceremonial censings of the 
Christian Church. But before enlarging on this, a word 
should be said with regard to the use of Incense under the old 
dispensation. Nor should this point be left without referring 
to Bishop Westcott’s commentary on this Epistle, in which 
will be found the most perfect setting forth in the English, or 


94 


probably in any language, of the mystery of the Lord’s present 
intercession. 

It will be remembered that in the Tabernacle, outside the 
first veil, which separated the Holy Place from the people, 
stood the Altar of Sacrifice to show that the way to God was 
shut up by sin. Only by blood could that way be opened at 
all, and then only to few, and to them at fixed times. In the 
Old Law, without shedding of blood was no remission, and 
‘almost all things were by the law purged with blood.” But 
immediately before the second veil, really belonging to (as the 
Apostle expressly tells us) the Holy of Holies, stood the Golden 
Altar of Incense. There, hidden from the sight of the people, 
rose up the smoke of the Incense, morning and evening, telling 
of a time that was to come, when no more would the shedding 
of blood be required, nor would veils shut out God’s people 
from access to His Presence, but that the veil should be rent 
apart and men might go freely to God, but even then cnly 
through the Incense of the intercession of the Great High 
Priest, Who ever liveth to make intercession for us, for no man 
cometh to the Father but by Him. This, however, was not 
all, for hidden likewise from the people’s sight was the Golden 
Table with the loaves of the Shewbread, which has been taken 
by the Fathers to be the type of the New Law’s new Oblation, 
the ‘“‘ pure Mincha”’ of the Holy Eucharist, the central act of 
worship of the Gospel; and it must not be forgotten that a 
vessel of burning Incense was set on the. top of each heap to 
cense the oblations. No doubt it is to this that Malachi refers 
when he combines (as always in the Holy Scriptures) the 
offering of the meal-offering with the burning of Incense. All 
without the veil was to pass away, but that within was to 
endure. It is worthy of note in this connection that so much 
has the Eastern Church been impressed with this universal 
coupling in Holy Scriptures of the offering of Incense with the 
offering of bread, that Incense is offered by her at every 
celebration of the Holy Eucharist, and its omission is looked 
upon by Easterns as a Roman corruption. 

But when once the Blood had been shed that “ paid the 
price for sinners due,” then the symbolical sprinkling of blood 
lost all significance and efficacy. By the law, almost all things 


95 


were purged by blood, but in the Gospel all things are brought 
to God, and sanctified, and knitin one, through the intercession 
of the Divine Atonement. Exactly in accordance with this is, 
and has been, the practice of the whole Church in the use of 
Incense. The Apostle says ‘that Moses sprinkled both the 
Book and all the people . . . . both the tabernacle and ali the 
vessels of the Ministry,” and in the law we read the particular 
way in which the four corners of the Altar were touched with 
blood, etc., etc. Now it is evident that, substituting censing 
for sprinkling with blood, we have the custom of the whole 
Church of God. We need no more atoning Blood; that was 
shed once for all, and a full satistaction made ages ago, but we 
need to be included in the Divine intercession, and hence we 
set this forth in mystery when we cense the book of the 
Gospels, and the holy ministers performing the service, and all 
the people, and the Altar at its four corners, and the Holy 
Oblations of bread and wine, and in procession the ‘‘tabernacle”’ 
(z.e., the whole Church), and “the whole house is filled with 
smoke,” which mystically sets forth that we on earth are 
wrapped in the cloud of the heavenly intercession. 

From the foregoing, it is clear that the offering of Incense 
in the Christian Church is the setting forth of the power of 
prayer, won by the Incarnation of the Divine Son ; it will not, 
therefore, be a cause of surprise to find that by our Western 
custom Incense is offered in the morning at Benedictus, and in 
the evening at Magnificat,! the daily commemoration in the 
choir offices of the morning and evening sacrifices of the old 
dispensation ; and since the object of the Incarnation was that 
He might have ‘‘a body” to offer to God in sacrifice, natur- 
ally it is about the Altar, where we keep the memorial of His 
precious death and sacrifice until His coming again, that the 
ritual censings are centred. 

It does not seem necessary to enter here into the 


1 In the Orthodox Eastern Church Magnificat and Benedictus together 
form the ninth “Ode” or Canticle from Holy Scripture at Matins. Whilst 
it is sung the Altar and all the church and congregation are censed At 
Vespers the censing corresponding with that which is here mentioned 
in the text takes place during the Psalm Kdpie éxéxpaga, containing the 
verse: Let my prayer be set forth in Thy sight as the Incense, etc. 


96 


theological meaning of each separate act of censing, all no 
doubt are the result of the teaching of the Spirit of God ; but 
there is one point of such great antiquity, and of such singular 
pathos, that it should not be omitted. Of course it will be 
remembered how usually, almost universally, in the primitive 
Church, the martyrs were buried under the Altar, and so it 
came about that the Priest, while censing the Altar at the 
South end, stooped down and censed the feet of the dear 
servant of Christ, and then again his head, when he was come 
to the North, and the whole body as he passed back from 
North to South. The bodies of the Saints are but rarely there 
now, but the Church has continued her method of censing, 
wrapping all, both quick and dead, in the all availing inter- 
cession of Her Great Head. 

It is no part of our intention to claim a Scriptural authority, 
or suggestion even, of every detail of the present method of 
using Incense in the Christian Church. We distinctly affirm 
with St. Thomas (vide loc. cit.) that its use does not rest upon 
the authority of the Mosaic law, but upon that of the Christian 
Church alone. We are ready to admit with many of the 
learned, among whom may be numbered Aquinas, De Vert, 
and Scudamore (against others of equal learning), that the 
desire of producing a sweet smell in a place which otherwise 
would have been foul, may have had something to do with its 
introduction into the Christian Church, as it undoubtedly had 
something to do with its being ordered by Moses for use in 
the Tabernacle made of skins. We affirm, with Tertullian, 
that we use Incense in a fashion different from the heathen, to 
wit—in a swinging censer, and not in a standing vessel, as the 
Pagans did. We are of opinion that the censing of persons 
and things is the only method of using Incense which is 
distinctly Christian ; and finally we deny that it is possible to 
find in this custom of the Church (be its antiquity what it may) 
any superstition, or the setting forth of any doctrine other than 
the perfect sufficiency of the Sacrifice of Calvary, and the need 
of all being gathered in one through the intercession of the 
Eternal Victim, which for a sweet savour rises before the 
Mercy*Seat on High. 


97 


SECOND TREATISE. 
By the Rev. D. Stone, Principal of Dorchester Missionary College. 


The method of using incense among the Jews was 
for the incense to be cast upon coals placed on the altar, so 
that the smoke of the incense arose from a fixed place. (See 
Mishna, Tamid v.-vi. ; Jena iv.-v.). 


Cf. Smith and Fuller’s Dictionary of the Bible, i., 1438 (ed. 2). 
Schiirer History of the Jewish people, I1., i., 295 (English 
translation). 
Vigoroux Dictionatre de la Bible, ii., 1778. 


In Ezek. viii. 10-11, the vessel containing the coals 
may have been held in the hand while the incense was 
placed on it. Compare representations on Egyptian monuments. 

See also Num. xvi. 6, 7, 17-8, 46-7; Rev. v. 8. 

The incense of the Jewish service appears to have 
symbolized by its fragrance— 


(1) That God was pleased to accept the worship and 
sacrifice of man ; 


(2) The gifts and blessing from God to man. 


In the earliest Christian worship Incense was apparently 
not used, probably partly because of the necessary simplicity 
before there was a fully-ordered organization of worship, partly 
because of the need of distinguishing Christianity from both 

- Judaism and heathenism. 

When Incense came into use it is impossible to say in what 
manner it was used at the first. 

Eventually the universal method of using Incense in 
Christian worship came to include the censing of persons and 
things. 

A custom which, so far as is known, differs from any either 
in Judaism or in heathenism needs explanation. 


1See Appendix A 


98 


The Incarnation made clear muchas to the relation of the 
material to the spiritual which was only dimly indicated to the 
Jews and introduced new relations, ¢.g., (1) Christian teaching 
about the resurrection of the body with all that it involves as 
to the material part of man’s life; (2) the institution of the 
sacraments. These are not isolated instances outside the 
general Christian system, but representative instances in 
which a Christian principle is embodied. 

In consequence of this, it would be reasonable that, when 
the temporary necessity of distinguishing Christianity from 
Judaism and heathenism had passed, there should be in the 
Christian Church (1) the use of Incense; (2) an extension of 
the meaning attached to it ; (3) a consequent extension in the 
method of use. 


1. Part of the symbolical meaning of the Jewish use 
of Incense was to signify the acceptance by God of human 
worship and sacrifice. This symbol would remain in any 
method of using Incense in the Christian Church. It would 
have an extended meaning. The reason why the worship and 
sacrifice of Christians is acceptable to God is that they are 
offered and pleaded in the Name of Christ and in the power of 
His merits. This extended meaning reasonably leads to an 
extended use. Each part of the Divine service can be rightly 
used only so far as the use of it is given its place in the plead- 
ing of Christ’s merits. The censing of holy things is part of 
the Christian witness to the truths that (1) matter is the 
creation of God, and as created is good ; (2) matter has a sacred 
office to perform; (3) matter can be rightly employed in Divine 
service only as the spirit in which it is used is that of dedicating 
it to God in the power of the merits of Christ. The altar and 
the cross, the book of the Gospels, the elements of bread and 
wine, are all, with their different functions, brought into the 
Divine service. Apart from the perfect work of Christ, they 
could have no value. When they are censed the Church’s 
testimony is borne that (1) they are accepted by God when 
offered by man; (2) they are accepted in and because of 
Christ’s merits. 

The.same applies to the censing of persons. The officiating 
priest offers to God an acceptable sacrifice. When he is 


99 


censed the Church bears testimony that (1) it is the Will of 
God to accept the sacred offering at the hands of the officiant ; 
(2) this acceptance is granted because the offering is made by 
the priest in the power of Christ’s merits. 

While the priest is given his office by God, it is also true 
that he is the representative and organ of the Christian laity. 
The offering which he ministerially makes is their offering. 
The act of worship and sacrifice is the act of the Christian 
body. That which the officiant ministerially does is the action 
of the congregation of baptized persons. When the congrega- 
tion is censed the Church bears testimony that (1) it is the will of 
God to accept their offering; (2) the offering is accepted 
because of the merits of Christ. The censing of a dead body 
similarly signifies (1) the Divine acceptance of the completed 
earthly life; (2) this acceptance is because of and in Christ. 

The use of Incense in procession is parallel. The procession 
is the Church’s supplication, or thanksgiving, or act of praise. 
The Incense symbolizes, again, that (1) it is the will of God to 
accept supplication, or thanksgiving, or praise; (2) there is 
acceptance because of the merits of Christ. For acceptance see, 
6.8, Brightman, Liturgies, Pp. 359. Ouptaud oor mporpepoper Xpioré 6 
Gcds judy eis dophy edbwdlas myvevwarinjs. Kor merits of Christ see, 
6.2 bid., 360, exddviey odpavors ) a&peth cov Xpiote kal rijs aivécews cov 
TANNS 1 Vii- 

2. The spreading of the fragrance of the Incense through 
the Holy Place symbolized the gifts and blessing of God to 
man. This symbol also would remain in any method of using 
Incense in the Christian Church and would have an extended 
meaning because it is through the merits of Christ that gifts 
and blessing are recived from God by Christians. In this 
aspect there is both what is negative in protection against evil 
and what is positive in the gift of good. Here, again, the 
extended meaning reasonably leads to an extended use. That 
which God uses receives blessing so far as it is capable of 
receiving it. This capacity differs enormously. The merely 
material object, so far as we can see, is affected by the Divine 
blessing simply by becoming a holy thing and by being made 
an instrument used in Divine purposes. Man, in proportion to 
his spiritual power of reception, receive from the Divine 


100 


blessing gifts which profoundly aftect his life. In censing things 
and persons the Church bears testimony that (1) they receive 
the Divine blessing both in separation from evil and in the gift 
of good so far as they are capable of receiving it; (2) this 
blessing comes to them by virtue of the merits of Christ. 

For protection and blessing see—e.g., Brightman, Liturgies, 
P- 360, oKéracoy hmas ev TH oKemn TeV TTEepvywv gov, amodiwtoy ap juov 
mavra éxOpdy xa morcutov, eiphvevooy huoy Thy (why. 

That which is blessed belongs to God.- The act 5 censing 
claims for God that which is censed. The merely material 
thing is recognized as put apart for his service, set apart from 
any other use than that in worship. The person censed is 
claimed for God. He is recognized as a member of Christ 
set apart to live a Christian life. 


3. The Incarnation made it possible for Christians to make 
representations of the human form which the Son of God took 
into personal union with Himself. Christian practice has 
made also representations of the saints. The doctrine of the 
Incarnation has an intimate bearing on the right attitude of 
Christians towards such representations. The human Body of 
our Lord is the Body of God, and in His Body He is to be 
adored. The body of a Christian is united to Christ and is a 
temple of the Holy Ghost, and, as such, is a sacred thing. The 
representations of Christ are sacred, and call for reverence 
because of Him of whom they are representations. So far as 
any saint is rightly reverenced, reverence is rightly paid to 
representations of Him. The essentialfpoint in the work of the 
seventh Gicumenical Council was the assertion of the scope of 
the Incarnation in this respect. The declaration of the Council 
that the Lord by His Incarnation {delivered from idolatry 
(Hardouin Concilia iv. 264-5) practically asserted that the Incar- 
nation showed the right place of that which is material in human 
life and worship. The careful and accurate distinction between 
the Aatpefa which is due only to God and the tpocndynois which 
may be directed to human and material objects (¢.g., ibid., 456) 
carried this out. Of this tpooxéynos the use of Incense was re- 
garded as forming part (ibid.) - Apart from the Incarnation, the 
censing of an image would be either meaningless or profane. 


101 


In view of the Incarnation, such an act testifies that (1) the 
image itself is accepted by God asa help to those who see it ; 
(2) the image is a holy thing as representing one who, by 
Divine Grace, has been made holy ; (3) the life of the saint 
who is depicted is an acceptable offering to God ; (4) the whole 
value of that which is saintly is derived from Christ’s merits. 

The theological importance of the ceremonial use of incense 
to cense persons and things and in procession may then be 
said to be: 


1. It isawitness to the scope of the Incarnation in bringing 
the material and the human into union with Divine work. 


2. It isa witness that the material and human cannot be 
acceptable to God except by virtue of the Divine blessing and 
of the merits of Christ. 


3. It has some special value at a time when there are wide- 
spread tendencies both to glorify the material in itself and to 
ignore the spiritual worth of the material in union with God. 


4. The abandonment of it in English Churches in which 
it has been adopted would involve ceasing to lay instructive 
emphasis on Christian truths in the way in which this emphasis 
existed universally in earlier times and exists at the present 
time in the rest of the Western Church and still more markedly 
in the Churches of the East. It would be regarded by Eastern 
Christians in particular as a retrograde step, impairing the 
fulness of the witness of the Church in England to the truths 
resulting from the doctrine of the Incarnation, and affording a 
barrier to external union. 


APPENDIX D. 


Weliby ates Thess 


OF THE 


Bois sur PER-COMPARED 


AND THEIR 


EVIDENTIAL VALUE CONSIDERED 


IN RELATION TO THE USAGES OF 


Mans SECOND YEAR “OF EDWARD. V1: 


BY 


(ETE tC Vin ERNIE Sle sGE I DAK I; 
Rector of Little Braxted, Essex. 


104 


‘104ye Apoyetpouruat 0 ‘rafead 
Surutou jo Suruurseq oy} o10ye ‘Surus0ut 
oy} Ul os[o9 IO ‘“QYSIU I9AO 9}yeIND oY 
0} souvu Itey} AjrusIs [feys ‘uorunmmoy 
ATOY oy} Jo sxoyxeyred 9q 0} puozut sv uew Cg 


NOINOWWOD ATIOH 


aadd YS) SAO AHL 
40 
NOILVULSININGY 


HHL wYOH AHdYO AHL 


ogg 


‘roqye ATOVeIpouUIE 


lo ‘surye, JO suruurseq oy} oL0ze ‘Surusou 


oy} UT os[a 10 ‘YOSIU TaAO dYeIND 9} 0} 
souleu tey} APs [peys ‘uotunutuog A[OY 
oq} JO stoyxeijted eq 0} puojut se Luew Og |p 


SSVW HHL GATIVO AINOWWOO 


NOINOWWOD ATOH 


HHL ANV 


duOt an AO-deddis 


COSNy 


67ST 


NI SV 


Ghehal a AMO rLabcalOhs SHOPMONE aaetb 


‘NHAID @NAH SV LdaOxXa 
ANOWAYAT) YO ALIY ANV ONIAUVA LONOHLIM 


AVSSiN ane 


NI SV 


NOINOWWOOD AHL 
JO MaduYO AHL 


87a 


TO) Ss) ae Eley 


105 


“OYBUTZSQO ST 4eY} WIT JOU 
pu ‘uorunmmog AToy eq} 0} uosred yuayztued 
ay} WUIPe 0} FYSnO asvo yey} UT A9JSTUT] 
ayy, : eoyeu pue ssouprvmorf SI UL TITS 
ureuer ynq ‘Aq1un ATpo8 v% 0} pepenssed oq 
jou [IM Ayred req}o ey pue : pepueyo yyy 
J[OsMIY OY yey OJ spueuie oYVU 0} puL 
‘my ysurese possedsery TQVY 1oyyO oy} Feqy 
Tle ‘gavoy sty Jo w0zj0q 94} WO “QALOLOF 
0} qua}U0D eq soURLIeA ye os sorted ouy 
Jo ouo JI puy “pa[louoded 9q 0} WAY] MOTY 
ay [UN ‘91Ge} G.GHOT 1} Jo stexejzred oq 
0} Woy} SuteyNs you ‘usle1 0} perjey pue 
QolTeUL YAoAreored oY WOM yXIMjoq ‘osoyy 


YJIM asn ayemg oy} [[eys depzo owes out, |b 


-keur A[jUeLUsAUOD VY SB MOOS sv ‘Op 
03 os esodind [ny ur 9q 04 JyesuaTY aIe[oep 
qseoy oy} ye 10 ‘oxyUN SuUOIM dUOp yey oY 
woy ‘sored ayy pesuodmooer oavy oy yety 
pue :pepueyo orem atoye Yor ‘poystyes 
aq Aqoreyy AvUL UOTyRSeLdU0D 9Yy Ye} ‘FIT 
AyyZneu sou10y sty popuoure pue ‘pojuedat 
Aju savy 0} Jlesuuy porepoep A[uodo 
savy oy [yun ‘eTqQeVy, Sp1o'T oy} 0} otUNS 
-aid 0} jou ostm Aue ut ‘WIIY estytoape pue 
‘UIIY [Teo [Leys ‘Joorsy} osps[Mouy Suraey 
eyeing oY], : peep 10 pzom Aq *sanoqystou 
sty 0} Suoim Aue ouop oavy 10 ‘papueyfo St 
wry Aq uoyese13u0o oy} yey} Os ‘ToAT] [TAO 


snot1ojou pu uedo ue oq esoyy jo Aue Ft puy 


“9YeUTYSQO ST yeqy 
wry jou pue ‘uorunuUTOg ATOY oY} 0} uosied 
quojiued yy yiupe 0} yYy.Nno ese yey} UL 
IOSIUTJT OUT, : OOT[VUT PU SSOUpPAVMOIF ST UL 
IQs uremoer ynq ‘441un ATpos vB 07 popensied 
aq jou qtM sgred rayjo eyy pue : pepueyo 
yey Fpestary oy yey} of spuome oyeuU 
0} pue ‘wy ysurese passedser} yey Toyo 
ay} yeu [Te wey sty JO wozo0q oyy WoIT 
AATSAOJ 0} FUSPUOD 9G GOUVITBA 4B OS sored 
ay} Jo suo JI puUy ‘peTfouoder oq 0} wWIsty 
MOU oY [UN ‘9[qve} S,pIOTT 97} Jo s1oyejsed 
aq 0} Wey} SuLegNs jou ‘User 07 porzey pure 
AOTTVUL YJOATOOIed olf WOYA 4XTAjoq esouy 
YU ‘osu oyeMQ ey} [[VYys Jopio owes ot, 


‘Keut ATFUSTUSAMOD oY] SB UOOS 
sv ‘op 0} os asodaind [[nF Ur oq ysveT Oy 4e IO 
‘oyun SuoIM oop YY oy WoT ‘soryred 947} 
pesuedmooer savy oy yey} pu : popudyo 
atom a1oye Yoram ‘poysyes oq Aqo1oyy 
keut uoyesersu0o oyy yey} : opty Apysueu 
JOUTIOJ Sty popuowre pu ‘poytodasr ATN.1y oaey 
0} Jasmiy perepoop ATuedo savy oy [yun 
‘g1qQvq S,pIO'T OY} 07 ounsortd 07 you ostm Lue 
UT ‘UIT OSI}OApPe pure ‘vary [TBO T[eYs eyeVng 
ayy, : poop 10 paxom Aq sMogystou sty 0} 
Suorm Luv ouop savy 10 ‘papuoyo st wry Aq 
uoesersu0o oy} yey} OS ‘XOAT[ [IAQ Sno 
-I10}0u pue uedo ue oq esoyy jo Aue Ft puy b 


106 


‘uado aq 
SJB [TB woyA oyun ‘poy AyY SITY 


: SULMOTI[OF JO9T[O sTyy 
YUM Takei S,pio'yT oy} Aes [Leys oTqey, oyy 
JO OpIs YWON 9} Je ourpuRys qsorg ey puy 


[‘A[uo sordims v rwom pue sav [[eqs 
ay ‘UOove IO 4salIg v SuIeq pue : yayoor B 
Teo pue eaey [eys ey ‘doystg 10 ‘doystq 
“Yory Suteq ynq : edog sou *yuauT}s9,4 ‘qTy 
Toy}Lou osn T[eYS ‘uOTeI}sTULUT sty Ur samt] 
Joy} [[@ ye pue ‘uorunuIUI0D aq} Jo sty} ay} 
ye IO4SIUTPL 94} Ye} ‘po}ou oq 0} st or0y puy | 


‘pres oq 0} pojurodde oq 
Jokeid Sutuaag pue sevid Suro py OOM 
‘TeoueYyo ey} UL Io ‘yoInYyQ ay} Jo Apog ay} 
Ur pues [TeYs ‘41 uodn YAOI uOUTT oy ITeZ 
v OWT} UOTUNWMOD OY} 4e SurAvY o[qQeT, OUT, |p 


6SS1 


‘sn uodn alorieur oneg epzory “ttt 
‘sn uodn otoreur oney ystaqg “ut 


‘sn uodn ofoseut oney epzory ‘nt 


‘suds [eYS SOxII[Q OY} spo 10 ‘oes lreys 
ysolq oy} ‘pepus omyesg oyorya : aatorjut 


ou} 10} poyurodde ouesg v ores oy [[eYys uoUy, 


‘uedo veq 
SOV [TW Woy OJUN ‘por aILHOIWIY 


“PO2<TLOD STG? UPL 
‘roreid sopio'] oy} ares [les ‘rey~y ay} Jo 


Sopplul oy} o10ze A[qumny surpueys ysormg ayy, 


‘Kep yey} 10 poyurodde 
wes & (44t [[eo Koy} se) QromyUT ao ‘aoqjo 
OU} LOZ YSI[SUG Ul SUIS SyIO[Q oY} [[eYS UT], 
“SopOlun} YI soqry ‘Avs 0} st yeqy ‘A1}STULUE 
Itey} Io} poyutodde soimysea oy} OSIMOATT 
wey} uodn eavy q[eys puy : aytsmbex oq 
TTeys sv ‘uonerysturmt oy} ur ‘\sorg ou day 
0} Apeer oq [Teys Auew os azoyy ‘suooveq. 
0 sysolig Aue oq a1oy} oraya puy ‘adog 
IO JUSIU}SOA B YIM ‘urerd oqry om e& : Les 
0} SE 4ey} “Uoryexjstutar yey} 10; poeyurodde 
ainjsea oyg wry uodn qnd qeys ‘Astaru 
Ajoy oy} enoexa [[eYs 4eYy \sollg 9yy 
‘uorunuTUtoD ATOY oy} Jo WOTeIYStUTU oY} OJ 
peyurodde owt oy} ye pue ‘dep oy3 uodg |p 


6rST 


“WOsTaT gy ody “ut 
“UOSIOTHOISIIGY ‘IIL 


“UOSIO[ YY OIA “TIL 


[‘esuaouy] “yloayuy 


‘OVA 
"1004U0D 


‘SUMAVEd AVOLVUVd ad 


SPSL 


107 


jo aaydeyo 
oyy UL uaz oTsidgy OL lb 


‘sny} Suluutseq ‘opystdq oy} peor [TeYs 
JSeLtg ay} ‘S}Oo[[oQ eu 1eqze Ajoyerpoutay |p 


7° * "pony ALHDINTY 


"4SoLI ‘herd sn 4orT |p 
‘Sutkes 
pue du Surpurys ysoltg oy} : Sury oy. IOZ 
BUIMOT[OF S}O2T[OQ OMY Osey} FO OUO TATA 
kep ay} JO YoOTTOQ oy? MOTLOF TTeYS UOT, lp 


+ + “qI0S SIq} 10}Jv OWNS oY 
JO suotssorssuel} Trey} Joy ALOU s,poy yse 
‘yuoupuvuiumog ATaAG Jaye ‘[[VYs sulpoouy 
ajdoed oy} pue : syuetUpuRUIMOD Ue, 944 
Te AIOUNstp osrVoYoI ysorrg oy} [[eYS Uo, 5 


ay} 04 jo zoydeyo 
oY} Ul M}}IIM ‘neg yurIVg jo opystdy ony, 


‘Surkes ‘asodind oyy 10y pousisse 
soyd v ut ‘apysidq oy} peer Treys ‘poyurodde 
SI Jey} ey IO ‘qsormd oy} ‘papue syOeT[OD ey, 

‘9 * * "DOH ALHDINTY 

“Avid sn 4orT |p *7892¢q 

‘Sudy oyy 

IOF ‘ASUAMOTOF S9}D9TTOQ OM4 osoy} Jo UO 
UTM ‘rep ayy JO Jo[[OD oy} OMOTO} [TeYS UOT, 
‘orerd Sn yory “98am ay L, 
‘oqratds Aq} YIM puYy ‘avamsunp oy, 
nok YALA oq apsory oy, 

‘okes pure 


atdood oy} 07 uty ou TTeYs ysormd oy} UO, 


‘goved YAIve UL PUY *894.19) 9Y,T, 
"YSIFT UO poy oj oq AI0TH 


‘urseq [Teys 
apiog seppoy 4v suXpurys oysoltg oy} voy, 


‘ysiphusy ur oT4stday 


*$499[][0,) 
“SULIT 


“4091109 


"SNLALAIO 
"ony ngqtaids wind 457 


“UINOSIQOA SNUIMIO( 


"+ + * OV SISTIOXe UT BITOTD 


108 


ajdoed oy} oyun orepoop [Teys ayemg ou} 
‘uoTyeVIOYXe 10 ‘ATIWIOy ‘uOULIES yous 109s V 


‘APLIONyNE 
uourmtos Aq YYOJ Jos oq 0} LOyJRoIOY «10 


“YqtOF Jos Apeo.ye sorfromoy oy} JO ou MOTLOF 
Tleys ‘uouttes ou oq o19y} JI ‘poor oy toy VW 


* * * ‘pox oU0 Ul AAaITNG | 


*p9eatg ot} pres oq 
Tleys ‘pepue suteq jodsoy pure opsidg oy} puy 


Jo zoydeyy 
OU} UI U994TIM ‘Tedsoy ary, 


‘snyy Surmurseq 
‘jedson uy Aes [Teys oy ‘popuo ofysidq ayy puy 


6gST 


BAS OJIN 94} [[eVYS uy} “ystIyOQ more 
Imo Jo poofq pue Apoq sy} Jo yuouTeIORY 
Ajoy 94} Jo Sutareoer Ay}I0M 94} 07 poqsoy 
-xo you oq ofdood oy JI uleteym : poprarp 
toyeorsy oq [eys Aoyy se ‘serpimoy oy 
JO 9u0 Jo uoT10d outos 10 ‘ATIMMOF 10 VOTER 
ay} AOT[OF T[VYsS ‘popuse poaig oy} I07;V |» 


“SOL OY} SUIS [[VYUS SAITO OU, 


‘poy ou UI GAGIIGE T 


‘urseq [Leys 
ysolig 94} ‘pepus jedsoy oy r0zTW : jodsoy 
oy} peor j[yeys wsyy wooveg 10 ysolig osu, 


"p1OTT CO ‘0043 09 aq Ar0T 
‘comsue [[eys edoed pure sx1a[Q ou, 
jo aoydeyy 
oy} Ul wezyIIM ‘fodsox, ATOY ey, 
‘Aes [peys 
‘Tedsoy ay} pee. 0} poyutodde ouo 0 ‘qsotad 
sy} ‘pepus epysidq oy} 10932 A[oyerpowuy 
‘opsidg oy} peor [reys wey seysturpE oN, 


67ST 


“COULIOS OU 
SUM o10y} USYM YsIpcuy Ul poxlool syuout 
-pueumog ua, pue ‘peeig ‘taderg s,p10'T |» 


‘opaig 


[‘asusouy] ‘yszhury wr tadsor 


“TenpeIy) x 


SPST 


109 


‘roddng 8,p1ory 
ayy 1 pary 07 ‘uarqyJorq peaoreq ATTvep 
‘aUIT} SIT} 4B TOJESO} OMIOD 94 TM 


‘uotunTITIOD ATOY ey} 0} 9UTOD 0} quesIidou 
ajdoed yy 99s [[eYs eyBINg ey USA souuty 
UIE}100 YB UOTZLILOYXS SITY MOT[OF [[VYS WOU, 


"yqaree 
uodn ste JURyITIUE yomnyy 8,4sI4) 
jo ayes ofoym ogy soy Avad sn gory 


“Kes [Teys Jsolig oy ‘ouop YOU J09}Je + SSUL 
-laFO PeUlojsnooe pue np oY} 94eVIN_ oY} OF 
fed yTeys uewom pue ueut A10A0 ‘poyurodde 
sep Surreyo oy} uodn pue : xoq s,uout 100d 
ayy ojUr owes oy} ynd pure ‘adoed oy4 Jo uory 
-oAop oy} 104323 ‘poqurodde wey} Aq «10430 
gwos IO ‘suopremM YomnyQ oy} [eqs uous, lb» 


‘UOTJO.I0 
-stp sty Aq JUSTUDATOD ysou YOHUIGy oy 
se ‘SULMOT[O} S2OEZUAG Bsa} JO 9LOUL 10 oUO 
Surfes ‘rood oy} JoquIEWeI 04 Woy} 91oYxe 
Aysourea pue : Surmoyjoy yoom oy} sAvp 
Suysey 10 sep Ajoy Aue oq o1oyy IOYyouAr 


8+ puequr 
op [ }xeu Aep uodn ‘esreyo 
pue omo oavy J s[nos esoyM uodn 
‘Ayperoodsa nok pues ‘spueuy avad 


“UO OFUN SpIOAL 
OYIT 10 osoyy Surdes ‘ATJUIST[IP LOU WOTUNUT 
-m0g Ajoy ey} FO Sutateoer oy} 0} SeATes 
-woeyy osodsip 0} ‘stouorystred sty y10yxe 
Aygsoures ysolig oy} [[eys Useyy, : wotuntT 
-W0Q 9q} 07 dUIOD 0} questTseu oq o[dood 
oy} ‘AepAtoy ro Avpung oyy uodn Ft puy |p 


*presun 
qjot oq Avur yt skep yoom oy} uodn ‘sorommyo 
ystted ul puy “YyUOUL B UT 9OUO ‘tO4qTIAL 
asoqe Uo WoYXS STYyY peel OF JuoTOYFUsS 
aq [[eYs 4 ‘UoTUNUTTMOD ATIep ST oLOy} OTOTLAL 
‘saortd aoyjo IO soyornyo Terpoyyeg Uy |p 


INOIABG INO Jo poojq pue Apoq oq} jo 
uorunwmmoy ATOY of} OF STO 0} pulUt 
yey of ‘paory oy} Ut poaozoq [Avo 


“QUIVS OT} BATIOOL 
0} popuULUt oq 4VY} esOTy 07 ‘UOTZLILOYXE SIyy 


"+ 6 + pueqyur Op T “Fxou 
UO ‘asIVyO puUB dIND GARY T S[NOS asOTTAL 
uodn Ayyeroedse nos pue ‘spusly va 


OMT 
Yous IO ‘YMOT[OF Lezyvotoy se ATureyd pue 
Ayaedo wey} 0} Suttes ‘ojo1oy} SaATestuoyy 
aredeid Aoyy yey} ‘yuesotd oq Yor 9soyy 
IO ‘SIOUOTYSUIVg STY 0} SuTuTeM Ato T]TeYS 
‘UOTUNTIMIOD OY} JoJSTUIME T[VYS 9 s10Zoq 
Kep ou0 ‘ysvoz ou ye to ‘Kep Ajoy 10 Avpung 
qxou oy ‘eyeIng IO ‘IwoTA ‘WOsTeg 99 ISA 


110 


“MOIABY INO Jo poorq pure Apoq ox} Jo 
uoruntaMoy TOY 97} 07 ewW09 0} putt 
yey} of : plory oy UI poaoreg aTuVaG 


“UOTzeIIOYXe sty} AVS 4soIIg oy} [[eYS UOT, 


‘syueyy Ajrvoy ysour r9yye,q ATUsAvoy 
INO poy AyYSruTY 04 zapuar 04 st Aynp 
MO SB YONUISBAOJ ‘paaofeq ATYVA, 


‘oven ay} JO UoTJeTOSIpP 


at} Fe “OsTe stqy pres oq [[eYs eutyoutos puy |b 


J 


GST 


suosiod of} 1OF ao1gns [feys se ‘our, pure 
peoig YONU OS oye} TO}STUTUE oyY [TeYS UoU,, 


‘SYIOIQ pue 
sioysturi 343 ydooxe ‘artnb oy} Fo 4yno 41edep 
Teys (uorunu0g Ajo pres oyy daataoer 
0} JOU pUTUT yVyy) 10430 [Ty “opts roqO ayy 
UO USUIOM oY} puUe ‘opIs oO oYy UO WOME ONY 
‘armb 943 Ystu sovld yuetueAU0D oUuIOS Ur 
Io ‘attnb oy} Ut [ys Arey TTeYs ‘uorunmU0g 
AToy oyy Jo stoyeyred oq [peys se Aueur os uy, 


‘SSULIOYO poeumoysnooe pue 
enp oy} 97eIND 949 0} Avd [peys uewIOM pue 
ueut AroAo ‘poqutodde skep Sutteyo oy} 42 
pay ‘purut efqeyrreyo pue Aqryqe sty 07 Sut 
~prod0v uo AroA9 xoq s,uout 100d oy} 03 roo 
eys ‘posodstp ore se Aueur os ‘A10,10 0 04} 
SUIS OP SHIO[O OY} softy ‘our wesw omy UL 


‘SULIEZO oq afdood oy yey ‘aumry 
oY} JO SSouyIOYS puv YASUI, 9q4 04 Sutproo9e 
‘UoqqyIIM eaoqe seoueques oy jo Aueut 
Io ‘euo Suts [[eys Aoyy ‘syIETO oq o10Y} OIOT MA 


“SULIOWO oY} ooze ATOyerpotauat 
‘roystuTM 9y} Aq pres oq 0} ULeY} JO OU asta 
10 ‘1ayo op efdoed oy} soriym Suns oq 03 
‘gangdiros ATOY Jo seouezueg osey} Jo erouL 
To euo AIO}LEYO OY} IOF MOT[OF [peys uoyy, |b 


67ST 


‘UINOSIQOA SNUIULO 


[-esueouy] “1011090 


SPST 


111 


‘sotaqna plo fq pasapo 4I St LOU ‘asn [eIOUIS B ‘TOAVMOY ‘JOU SPA STUY, x 


‘IESIY 4SOUL pIOTT CG ‘eet, 07 oq ATOTS 
: £10{8 AU, JO [UJ ere YAIVe puv usavoy 
:sqsoy Jo pox paury ‘Ajor ‘Ajoy ‘ATOPY 


“og ‘saSUY JIM 1OJOIOYT, : MOTLOF [TeYs 
Ayoyerpouumt osja 10 : poeyurodde ATperoods 
Aue oq ot0yy Jl ‘aut, oY} 0} surpr0008 
‘govjorg dedoid oy} Mopjoy yreqs soy | 


“SUIS OSTR TTVYS SYIOTQ oY} SUI, 


“‘ssoT[STY OT} UI 
‘proryT OQ ‘eeyg, 03 ATOpPH : prory ey} Jo 
sUIVU OT} Ul YOULOd 4yVY} OY SI possolg 
‘qsoqsty oy} ul yeuuesg : Ar0pS Ay, 
jo ][0F ere YyIvo pue udsAvoy :SzSOH] 
jo por) paory ‘Ajou ‘Ajo ‘ATOH |b 


‘om ‘SToSUB YJIM OLOFOIOULT, 


pMOTOR Weds 
Ajoyetpourwat spo 10 (‘pozyurodde AT[e1oeds 
Aue oq o10y} JL) omy oY} 0} SuTpr0900" 
‘govjord aedord oy} mMojjoy TTeys oF |» 


‘qiaids Sy} UytaA puy 
"nok YyM oq PLOT EU, 


“AVS T[VYS Sol oy} uot, 
:reqyy ey} wodn ourm pue prerq oq} yyQOq 
Sunjes puy :40yeM uvopo pue sind 91991] 
e@ ojyeroy} surygnd ‘(Atos JOU TTL sorTpeyo 
oy} JL) sn yeyy 10j poredoid ‘dno yusrueauoo 
IO ALBF OULOS UL STS IO ‘DOT[RYO OY} OUT OUTAM 
oy} Suyynd puy : osodand yey} 10f poredeid 
Sur} Apewoo reyy}0 ouLos ur 10 ‘ueyed oY] UT 
asje 10 ‘setodioo ayy uodn peorq oy} surdey 
‘uoruntmumog TOY Vy} sAteoor 09 poyutodde 


“dans fy 


x Lesteouy |] ‘eessty, uous) 


*snjourg 


‘goRjorg 


“eployy TUNSANG 


112 


‘soliqna plo Aq yasap4o 41 St Iou ‘asn [e1eues @ ‘TOAOMOY ‘JOU SUM SIT, ». 


"* * * Jauroqd 


‘ajdood 
ay} OF JUOUIBIORY oY} SUIMEYS IO ‘UOT}eADTO -sejq uodo ue oq oxoy uem Aue ay 
Aue qnoyjIm ‘reqpy ey} OF [Ws Suram 
‘pres oq 0} o18 posivayer o10Joq spOM osoU, “qUOTARIOvY 944 OY} 03 Apres 
oq OIA utoy 03 Avs 4solIg IY} [[eYS UU], 
‘oul JO soURIGUIETOI <= on on 


UL Ai yup {[eys nok se 4JO 8B STG] OC fi 
?SUIS JO UOISSIUe. 04} ATOZ ‘AUBU JOT SuyuL0d ef “prory oY} WI peaoyeq ATavaq 
* “YJOMOTLOF Sv WI] JAOYXS snyy [Teys pue 
: d yaa! Bh ‘uolunMIUINg oY} JO sZeyeyred oq 0} pesod 
Se ee eee Ot Sey CUS see eo eto -STp o1v YeU} Wey 0} uINy pue ‘poreaocd Ieq/B 
2 ay} uodn ysor oy} aAveT “yysnvap Io dns ATUO 
‘dno oy} yoo} oy doddns 10938 ostMoyIrT suo Suryey ynq ‘yesury [ye dn 41 yup you 
= ‘spuey ‘kep yey} pue £41 oyun ynd 107eM ouOS YITM 
Span Pod oi Se) PRR eee 
‘peerq yoo ss9rq_ Tregs ‘oy 9eyy oaes ‘WIIOoy pue IauueUT 
( sues 9} 109}Je [[IS OnUTZUOD T[eYs 4T os 
posevayoq eens adh, qystu POLES OUP UE : ojdood oy} Oates [[IA SB YONI OS o7eIDeSTIOD 


“ratqyeq ATUeavety ano ‘poy AyyStut 

ou ual [ Be erUry) OM ‘POH SUTIAT[LIOAO pUe ALHOIWTY pue ssoqq ‘eredeid 09 ‘Apoq oy Jo yuaweIOKeS 
' : Surmoyoy roXerd sty aU} WYIM ouop yey ysorIg oy} AT[eNSN 9070} 
2 PO MOTIONS ‘Aqjouljsip pue ATurefd ‘surs ro Aes [peys -oray sv ynq ‘(paepraord aq [[eYys Iepi0 reyy0 
ate : : [Yun) ssey oug ur AuomeIED IO 9411 Iayjo0 Aue 


se ‘Avs jeys dn Surpueys ysomg oy} uous] =. 15s 7 
IeqTV 9} OF WIY suruINy “ysolzg oy} UIT, |p JO BuIATVA oY} JNOUILM ‘GUoULeIONS By PoATIO 
‘YoIny SystUQ -82 WEY FTesuATY ysortg 949 yey} xoqye ATOyeIp 

Jo ayeqs ofoym ony soz Kead sn gory OUT 9q [[eYS UorUNUMIMMOD oy} JO oT, OUT, 


‘Kes pure ‘ojdood “UOIUNTUUIOL) S489 x 


: oy} 0} WY UINy ‘UODvEG IO ‘4selIg oy} [Tes , 
[‘eutoo 04 otunsead you Op aM | Woy} ‘SUISUIS OOP oARY S¥HIBIQ O49 Udy AA |p ‘leq snusy “4sOoy] Jo uoMoery , 
6PS1 SPST 


69G1 


113 


‘snyy Avs ‘atdood oy] 
0} Jjesuy Surumy pue ‘dn pues (uosord 
sureq) doysig oy} 10 ysorg oy} [[eYys uot, 


[Se ASTID snsop 
pio ano jo weujey ‘poy ALHOINTYy 


*soouy Iteyy uodn 
A[quny surjsouxy [ye “Jpostury ysertq oyy Aq 
IO ‘s1o}sTUIUL oY} JO 9uUo0 Aq osTo IO ‘ULET} JO 
uo Aq IoyyTe ‘uUOoTUnUAMMOD ATOFT 9YY VATOOII 
0} populu ore yeYy 9SOyY [[e Jo ouIeU OY UL 
‘gpeul oq UWOIssefUoO [eIOUES SITY TTeYs UOT, |» 


DO OD O FaVoy.l MareYO ey 
Ayysoureo pue AynIy op yey} 0X 


‘uotunmaUI0g ATO 9} 9ATODOI 04 
gwU0d Fey} Woy, 0} Avs ysorIg oy} [[eYS uoU,y, | 


:snqy Les ‘ojdoed ou} 0} JesuuTY 
Sutumy pue ‘dn puvys ysorg oy} [[eys wory, 


7 5 9 asTIQ snsor 
piory IMO jo JUV ‘GOD ALAvIWIy 


*soouyy Itayy uodn 
q1qung surjeouy [le ‘Jjosumrg ysorq omy Aq 
IO ‘SIOJSTULUL 9} JO ouUo Aq osTo IO ‘mMOY} JO 
euo Aq JOYALE ‘UoTUnUMWIOD ATOH{ OY} VATOOOI 
0} populu ore yey} osoyy [Te JO oureu ot} UT 
‘gpeul oq UOISsoyUOg [eIOUdS sIty T[eYS Uo, 


O 9 1G nok 
quodoa ATSouLve pu Ayn14 Op 4yeyy NOX 


‘Aes TeYs 
pue ‘uotuntm0g Ajoy oY} 0} oWOD yey 
OSOY} PAVMOZ WHI UINY [[eYS ySoltg oy} o10}F] 


“nok T}IM 
AwMpe oq plory oyy jo ooved oxy, 


‘Aes ysoltg oy} [[eYSs WOU, 


‘snqy Avs ‘ojdood 03 0} wiq 
Surumy ‘pue ‘dn purys ysottg oy} [7eys wey, |p 


nO SUL ESTIS ols 
paoryT mmo jo Joey ‘poy ALHSINTY 


*sooUy ITT} 
uodn ATqumy Sutpsowy [Te ‘FJOSUATY ySoLIg oy} 
kq 10 ‘sto4sturpy oY} JO ou0 Aq osTe IO ‘uMay} 
Jo ouo Aq LoYYLo ‘UoTUNTATIOD ATO 9} DATOOOI 
0} popuUlUt oie yey} osOy} [TeV Jo oweu oy} 
UL OpeUl 9G UOISSeyUOH [eIeuEs ve ][eYs Ud, 


"+ + + nok qued 
-oa ATSaurvo pue ATNIy Op yey} noX 


“AVS [TVYS JSoIG ot} 
‘asned op {IT  Ioyye pure :90vIS OF VAT SuTIq 
UOTLJIOYX poos YIM uvo oy TayZorpa os 
pur ‘oimsto, yuUeTUsATIOD qe ATIATAd WaTy WATAN 
SUNTIULOD WY, JOT Woy ‘op 0} os Aue oatoored 
oy JI pue :jJOsuIy MeIpYyTA [[TM ueut Lue 
Jt 908 0} ‘oTIYA v osned [[eYs ysotIg ey} o1oF] 


114 


“Avs TTeYS oy ‘peorq oyy 
YJeLoaljop oy UsyYM puy ‘“SuITeouy spuey 
toy} ur etdood oy} 0} roqye pure ‘(a0qysTureT 
Joryo oy3 djey Avut Ady, yey) quesoard 
e19y} oq Auv JI ‘s1o4STULUT IoqYO 0} 4T IOATLOP 
}xou pure ‘J[osuIT spury YyOq UL UOTUNTITIOG 
OY} VATOOOI YsIy AOYSTUITA oT [[Vys usu, 


[-etqey Aqy 
SITY} OF OTI0D OF OINSOId YoU Op TAK 

*SULMOTOF 
Jokeid styy ‘uorunurtog oy} oAteoer [Tes 


yey} Woy} Te Jo omeu oy} ur Avs ‘pxrvoq 
$,poy 4 UMOP sUT[PPeUy ‘ysotig oyy [[eYs UU, 


‘sqavoy anok dn yyy 


“suttes 
‘posooid T[eys ysortg oy} ‘WOTYA oy} roIZV |p 


* * * *SpIOM OTQBITOJUIOD 4VIPAN IVOTT 
‘Aes Os[B YSOLIg oyy [[eys ust, 
‘royyeq ATWoAvey amo ‘poy ALHOINTY 


GSGT 


‘soptooM sot} 9UO 

Arono 04 Avs T[eys oy ‘oyst1yQ Jo Apog oy 
jo oyUOtIRIOeG OY YJorIONT[Ep oY USA puy |p 

‘atdood 

oY} 0} Loe pue (‘AoysTUT, VFETTO oyy odjoy 

0} Apeor 90q Avut Koyy yey) ‘oyueserd o10Yy 

oq AUB FI ‘STOYSTUIP[ I0q}O 0} 4 LonITep }xou 

pue ‘ojyjesury sepury yjoq ur uoTunuTMOg 
oy} onleser o4sIy ojsetrg oud T[eYysS uoyy, |p 


roqqey Au 
SIq} 0} WIOD OF otUNSeId yOU OP TM 
“Sutmoypoy raked s1yy 
‘UOIUNMIMOD 9} GATODOL [[VYS FVyy ‘TMS [[e 
jo owaeu oy} ur Avs pues ‘uMop Jeeuy ‘pavog 
S,poxy) 0} WIY SuIUINy “YsorIg oY} [[VYS UE, 


UJIVS JSLID AMOIABG 
INO SpAIOM O]TGVILOJWIOD YeYAM ATVOFT 


‘Kes OSTe Soll oy} [[eys UIT, 


“r9yeq ATUOAVeY INO ‘GOH ALHOIWTY 
67ST 


*SUTMOT[OF SPIOM osaty 9u0 ATOA9 04 Avs T]eYS 
ay ‘asttyQ jo Apoq 9y} Jo yueureIOVs oy 
SESNGISY® EKO) O SNE) WG Ee [OAS SEE) Ghul) OY 
Ieqye pue ‘qsomg oy} djey 03 Apeor oq Avut 
foyy yey} ‘quosead e109 oq Aue Jr ‘s104sTUTPL 
ou} 40} «Asay «‘UOTUNTIMOQ §=«9Y} = JOATIOP 
Tlvys ysong oy} pue ‘surpeouy ATUEIEAeI 
TIys etdood oy ‘ostx ysolig oy} T[eys ue, 


sos orqer AqT, 
SIq} 0} OeUI0D OF otUNSeId JOU Op AV 


“SUIMOTLOF TofVaAd sty} ‘uoTUnMMOD oy 
OATOOOL T[VYS yey Woy} [[e Jo oureu oy ur 
‘kes pue uMOp [oeUy ySolig oy} [[eys us, |p 


“* * © INOmEd 
INO SPIOAA OTGVILOFWIOH JVM AVaAET 


‘snyy Avs ‘oydoed ot} 03 WIY 
Surumy ‘pue ‘dn purys ysog ou} TTeys usu, |p 


raMod 
qo, WeY OMA “plory passoq ung 


SPST 


"ce e @ 


115 


OP eeE oq 
pue ‘oeq} JoJ poys SBA\ poorq s4stIyO 
qv} osouvaiqmiouled UL sity yur 


“Aes Tpeys 
dno oy} yoroarfap yeyy Joysturmt 043 puy |» 


*“SUIAIS 
-syuvyy yqras ‘yyrey Aq qavoy ATTY UT VAI 
uo peey pu ‘oot, AOJ perp ysIIyO 4eVyy 
soUBIqUATIET UI ‘SIT 4'vo puUe Oye, 


‘goved ATTY 
sn qunvss : oppo oy} jo souuds ory 
Keme ojsoyey yey} “pos Jo aque, O 

‘sn uodn 
@INIOU ONVY : Op[AOA oy} JO SOUUTS OTT} 
Kvae oysoyey yet} ‘pos Jo equiv Q ‘U 


‘SuXs ][VYS SoyILTO sy} oud} UOTUNWTOD Hy} UT 


“UOPPTM 
aLOJod PULINOF UI ‘pnoyzq ey} fo yuouIRIOVY 
ayy roysturtd (ontpodxo o10ur IO}) ot TeYs OS 
‘Kpoq oy} Jo youvsoeg oy YYZO1O}SIUTU JSOLI 
oy} sev pue :oorreyQ oy} JIM MOTOF oY 
]eys Usyy “4Qsolrg Joyo IO WOVE B oq SLOT FT 


‘oJAT SUTJSVTTONG OJUN oTHOs pue sdpoq 
Ay} onszoserd ‘soyy OF poys SBA TOTTAd 
eyslIyO suse splory Ino jo pnoyq oy, 

‘Aes Tyeys ‘o1our ou pue 900 


ayuttp 07 ou0 Arono Sumes pure ‘pnorq oy 
JO JOUIV.IOVY OY} SULIonIjop LostUIp, 9} PUY 


“ayy 
Suysejrono oyun oynos pue odpoq Aqy 
enaeseid ‘o0} IOJ UONOS SVM OTPOTTM 
oIsII[O Snsef epaory ano Jo Apoq eu, 


“U9JPTIM OIOFOG WIIOF 
UL ‘OUTAA 9} IOJsturIU UOT}Ipedxe s1OUL IOF 
oy T[VYS Os ‘peoiq 94} YJoLoJsTUIMA ysoLIg 
oY} sv puv ‘OodITVYO 94} YIM AMOTLOF oy TTeYsS 
usu} “ySolIg eyo Io uooVaqY B 9q oIOY J] 


‘OJIT SUIYSVTIOA OF [NOS 

Ay} oaresord ‘oay} IO} poys SVM OIA 
‘ASIyO Snser pAOTT INO JO pool[q FH, 
‘kes TTeys Solow ou pue 9ouo 


yUIIp 0} 9UokIOAD SUTATS pu ‘pootq eyt 
JO JFUOTVIOVA OY} SULIOAT[Op ysolIg oy} Puy 


‘oFIT SuTysvpraaod oyun Lpoq 
Ay} sdrosard ‘aoy} JO} WAATS SBAL YOIT[AL 
‘qslIyQ Suse piory Ino jo Apog aHy, 


116 


“SUISSOT STO} YIM ytedop wy yo] [Tes “ques 
-old oq oy Jt ‘doystg oy} 40 qsortg oy} UOT, 


"+ * + “YSTY UO pox oF oq ATOTH 
suns 10 pres oq [[Teys uory, |p 
** 5 * "pOH SUIAT[AOAO PU ALHOINTY 
“STULL 10 lb 


“sjUBATOS oTquINy, 
Aq} ‘am ‘royyeq ATWeAvey pue auory CO 
"YJOMO|[OF SV pres oq TTeYS 10}ZV |p 


‘uortyod 
Aiaao wiIy 1037 Suyroder ofdood oy 
‘rodvid s,p1ory oug Avs 4sorg 9yy [Teys wou, |p 


Sol 


: SUISSOT STUY UIT yaedep wory 497 [Leys 
‘ojdood oy} 03 wy SutumMy ysotIg oY} UO, 


‘poy suyseproao pure AVySIWITy 

‘Lead sn yory ‘psa oy, 

“qiids AT YIM PUY ‘wansup ay, 
nok YPM aq PIO'T OUT, 

‘surkes pure 

‘ajdood oy} 07 4Say way Suruimy ‘pozvorunut 


“woo oAvy yey} woy T[@ Jo omeu 9st 
UI “POH OF SYULYY OATS T[YS ysolig oy} UO, 


“UOTUnMIMOD 4sod oy] poTTeo ‘uoTUNUE 
-wo0g AToy ey} 10372 ‘ouo akep Arona Suos 
Io pes oq 03 ‘amydizog AToy Fo soouequeg |, 


“‘uolunMIMOD 4sod oy} Suds 
SOYIVIO 9} TLVYS usy} ‘pepus st uotunuUIOD 
ey) UsYM pue ‘toTUntAUMOD AToY ey} enfooe4r 
yop osellg oyj se oUOOS OS SuUIUUTSOg 


67ST 


[ paatoqjos 
TesstusIp pue UwoTUNtMUIOD-4sog 94} 9s0UIS 
‘qomnyO oy} WOLF ow yng ‘reypy eu} ULOIT syuURO 
-TUNWUOY oY} pessTUIsIp Sursserg stag, +] 


4 SUISSITQ 


sty} wgIa gxredop ofdood oy} yet ‘atdoed 
oy} OF WIY surumy “4sorg oy} [eqs udu, 


“qredop 
De i 
atdoed oyy yoy | * * + qsormg eug yreys ueqy, by] 


SPST 


jer 


*TOYSTUTUL 
ay} JO aorjetostp oy} Aq ‘AULT Io ‘uorunu 
-m0g ‘raked SuIMOA pur SUTULO;, JO 1ayy10 
‘sjooTTOQ 94} Toye ‘oATos [[eys Worsvooo 
sv Uso se os[e pres oq AvUT sues OY} PUY 
‘guo kep yons Arda9 ‘MOTUNUIULOD OU SI 910} 
woyM ‘ALOWLOYO IY} 1o}ze pres oq OF spoo[[op 


‘usury ‘seme nod YL ureter 
pue ‘nok yssuowe oq “soy A[OH 
ay} pure ‘uog or} ‘aoyey oy} ‘APYSuaye 
poy jo Surssojq ey} pue  : plory 
INO 4SIIYQ unser UO sIy JO pus “pory 
JO @AOT pue ospo[MoUy ot} UI Spur 
pue sjrveq moX dooy ‘ourpueysiopun 
T[® yjossed yor ‘poy jo coved any, 


“ouo 
kep yous Arso ‘UOTUNTIMOZY) OU ST 91OTT} 
voy ‘K10}L9YO OY} LO}Je pres oq 0} $}Oo[[0D |» 

‘oy ‘paaojoq AT rVve(J 


“SULUULSOq 

‘yorjye}10yxo oy} pue ‘ATTULOFT oy} “pootp 

ayy ‘SISjooxe UL PLLOTD oy} ‘pozyTMo 9q 

Aevum usyy, :sosnoy oyeatid ut to ‘Aepytoa 
oy} WO oFBAGo[OO ST UOTURLUTTOD ATOY BY} WO AL 

“OUIS OF 

Woy} IoF oroy poyurodde ssuryy Te Avs [reys 
qsoltg OU} OL0yy ‘SYTO[O OU OL O1OT]} OLOTLAA 

“UdTLY 

‘ramsuv [peys ofdood oy} uot, 


‘Aempe nok ITA 
ureutor pus nos yssuowe oq “soy AO 
oly pur ‘uog ot} “Toye OY} ‘AV OU y 
poy jo Suisse oy} puy : poy 
INO ASYQ susee Wog sTy Jo pur “OH 
JO OACT pUB sspoTMOUY o{} UL Spur 
pue sjrvoy amos dooy (Surpavysiepun 
Te Yjessed yous) (OH Jo soved ot, 


UOTLY 
“romsue [preys oydood oy} YOU ou OF, 


‘paory 
IMO 4ST) snsef Uog SIFT UI pus “poy 
JO OAOT PUB OSpo|MoUy oy} UL ‘spurUt 
pue sjavory amok deoxy ‘surpuvyszepun 
Ti’ qyessed yorya ‘por jo saved oxy, 


118 


*asn 
UMO SIT 0} FI oaty ((eYgS o}eINQ OY} ‘uTeUTEI 
oUIM IG pRaiq oyj3 jo ue Ft puy ua} 
-jo3 oq eur ATWUsTUAAUOO yey} ‘pearq yeoym 
ysornd pue qsoq oy} 4ynq ‘syvout Joyo YT 
2142} OY} 4B Ua}ee oq 0} [eNSN st sv ‘ONS 
aq pvoaq oY} Yet} sous TTeYs 41 ‘ourM pue 
peeiq oyy Ul savy yYStur 10 ‘yyey Uosaod AUR 
yorya ‘uorjyssedns oy} AeMe oye} 0} puy | 


oSGL 


“SUISSOT] PITIOJsNdOe 94} YITM yea; UIOTT] 
JOU yeys ofdood oy} oF Witt Satumy woyy 
puy “uorjasosip sty Aq ‘aaros [[eYSs WOIsevd90 
SV SUD} MIMALOJe sjOITOQ 9Yy} JO OM} ID 
oUO ppe [[VYys usy} puy ‘A10j}LOYo oyy 19}ye 
[un ‘(teddns s,ptoryT oq} Jo UoTPeIQayoo ayy 
ye pres oq 0} poyutoddy) weypy oq} 4e ssuty} 
Tle Aes pue ‘adoo v yyIM ‘oorydans 10 oqry 
ured v wiry uodn ynd qeys ysorg 943 (pepua 
Aueyy oy} 10}7e) skep osoyqy yok “qsorrg oy} 
YQIM o}yVOTUNUIMIOD 0} OUOT Oq dIOY} YSnoyy 
puy ‘ssouysry sty Aq poyutodde ostmioygjo 
oq [[eYys IO St se 1Q :suotjounluy s,Aysoleur 
s.sury oy} Aq poyutodde si se wa0F Tons 1997 
‘soovid [[e@ UI Suns IO pres oq {[eys Aue wy 
ysiisug ou ‘skepiaq pue shepsoupe,, uodg |p 


“asuyO 
nsee Momeg mo jo Apog sjoyM oy} uoTy 
Jo Yor Ur qnq ‘ofoyM oYy Ur UeYy gaed UL 
peAateoer 9q 0} SST YUIYA Jou ysnuUT UOT Puy 
*poNqIIysIp OS puv ‘I94STUTUT 9} JO WOTZ910STp 
oyy Aq ‘orou 10 ‘ysvat oy} ye ‘sooord omy UL 
PeplArp oq [[Vys ou0 ATOAD puv : sodeId soap 
ul pepratp Ayjde oq Av 4r yey} os ‘sem 4T 
UL} IOYOIY} pure 19s1vl lou Surqyowos pue 
‘quid Jo LoUURUT [Te JOYA yng ‘ar1oFe seAL 
41 sev ‘punor pue ‘pousavarun ‘Aes 0} st yey} 
‘UOTYSe} puw 4IOS eUO 1O}Fe ‘UITVEI STU} [Te 
Yysnoryy ‘opeut oq WotunMIMIOD oY} OF pored 
-oid poi oy} yey} yoo SI 4I ‘UOISUOSSTp 
JO UOISvODO pUR Ss10}}VT [Te Jo Surproae 107 


6FS1 


‘qstIyQ nsor TMO0lIAeY Ino Jo Apoq 
efOYM “oYy} Wey} JO YOvo uL guq ‘afoya oy} 
uL uey} “Qaed UL peatooat aq 0} ssoy YUIY Jou 
gSnul UsUL PUY “peyNq jsp OS pue ‘Ta}STUTPL 
Oo} JO WOTELOSTp oY} Aq a10UU 10 ‘ysBal Oy} 4B 
‘soord OMY UL UAyOIG oq [[VYS sprog payeroes 
-uod ples 9y} jo AsoAD puy ‘“pstWojsnooR 
used YJVY sLOJojJorlay se Yous oq ][[eys po}es1o 
-9Su09 oq [[PYS Jey} pvelg oy} yey} ‘a}]ON 


SPST 


119 


‘Aepung A1eAo sosnoy ITY} JO Iepaso0 
4q ‘owes oy} roy pred savy Aayy oj10yyry 
yorym ‘soiynp i9yjo 10 ‘Aauour jo sutns 
yous jo posreyostp oq [Teys ysteg oy} pue 
‘Yslieg oy} Jo sosreyo oy} ye ‘suopremyounyo 
oy} pue ‘ayeing oy} Aq poeptaord oq [[eys 
UOIUNMIWLOD 94} IOF oUTM pue peeiq oy, 


*£1vIZU0D OY} 0F osned 
etqeuosear @ oaey Loy ydeoxo ‘qsvet oy} 4e 
Aepung AIO9Ad Io4STUTUA OY} YALA WorunuU0g 
oy} oAlodar [Te T[eys Aoy ‘sucoveq pue 
sysorig Auvu oq o10TM ‘seyorInyo o}eLsa[[o9 
pue [erpeyyey Ur puy “4Selld of} YIM 9}e9 
-IUNUIULOD 4SB2T OY} Ye VoIT} IO ‘mo; ydeoxo 
‘UOTUnWUWOD OU eq [[VYs e104} yeA : UOTUNUT 
-WOQ OY} 9AIINOI 0} WOT}A.IOSIp Fo ‘YsIIeg oy 
ur suosiod AjUAM} BAOQ JOU aq 910} JI PUY |» 


*UOMJOIOSIP SIY 0} SuIpIO9Ne 
Qsolug oY} UJIM oJeoruNUIUIOD 0} JequaNnU 
poos e@ eq o1reyy ydeoxe ‘1eddng s,paory 
oy} JO WOTeIQe[I0 OU oq T[eYS 9104} puy |» 


“OALOS [[PYS 
UOISBDDO SB ‘pastvayod V1OJoq SOOT[OQ aset} 
jo o10Ul 10 9UO pue : Yee UL o10y JULY 
-I[IW YOINYO SASLIyO JO 9}e}s V[oyM oY} LOZ 
‘rahvad [e1oues OY} YIM Sutpupouoo ‘ATrULO FT 
oy} Jo puso oy} [HUN ‘uorUnMIMOD 9q4 4e 
pezurodde st yey} Te pres eq [reys ‘uorunut 
“mOQ OU eq o10y} Jt ‘skep Ajoy oy} uodg |p 


‘aot Sjoy pAvs 
eyy Aed puv opudsy 03 Quoom orom oy se 
‘9SM09 pUe sIpIO SYONS UL yey} pu ‘soyeINg 
pue smoyseg i«foy} Jo osn oy} 03 (oures 
oY} YJIM porozoO oq 0} JUOM OOM SV SoSUTTY 
Jeyjyo pue ‘Aouour oyons [Te yt) oyor AToy 
ey} Jo cord pure rmorpea o4ysur oxy ‘A10,10TO 
ey} Jo ourky oy} ye ‘Aepuog A19n9 eyo TTeYS 
eysteg eArONS Jo sLouoLysUeg oy ‘sesareyo 
pue saqysoo eyons jo souedmooer ur 4eyy 
‘perp1o eLOJoLoy} ST 4t (Oures oY] onder 0} 
qtoyuioo pengtads «fey 10; posodstp oqyeys 
s1ouorysiieg «soy se 4yo sv) uorunuTMOg 
Ajoy 9y9 IOF oULAA puUe oproIg yuoroyNs 
‘samo Idoy} UI sadreyo pue soqysoo a«Xoq 
qe pudy ATTenUTZUOO yeYs owmpeer sy} UTM 
soyZMg pue sMoyseg ol} sv oyontosIoy puy 


“qomnyyg ystred roy} 07 410so1 (oures oy} 
JO SUTATIOO®I IOF) OST IO ‘uOoTUNUIUIONg OY) 
JO sosreyo oy} JO Sutrveq oY} IoF worstaoad 
aq eqLIVYO ouOS oYvUE LOYALO ysnum Loy a10yy 
‘peorq Ajoy Aue Aed 0} powoysnoor useq 
you yyey ojdood oy] o1oyM poxouue sjodeyg 
yous Ul puy ‘4solig oy} YI oyvorunut 
-UL09 0} OOS oq oLoY} Ydooxe ‘1eddus s,paory 
oy} JO UOTZVAQoToO OU oq T]eYS o10Yy ‘sooeTd 
Joqjo TTB pure ‘poxouue spodeyg ut ostmoyry 


“qSollq{ OY} YIM o}VOLUNUTUTOD OF posodsrp 
euou pure ‘yornyo oyj ut Kerd 07 porqurosse 
ATqeuroysno oq ojdood oy} toaoosuoya ‘skep 
TayyZO [[B posn oq T[VYS tepxo, owes ayy, puy 


‘du Surgyiy 10 uotyeaoy Aue WoyyIM 
pue wrdéozpavad wmauorssrua. ur wnjapuntfa 
syn otd ga siqoa oud inh ‘spxIom asayy ye 
SuIpue pur ‘Ysa wnzvuMs wonhpsod opowu Yury 
‘spIOM oSoy} Je SuruuIseq ostmoxI, ‘e10UL 
IO ‘piryj oy} OS pue ‘IeqjOUe 9}eIOBSUOD puUe 
‘aaedoid ‘ATjNOAep pure ‘ATJUETOAGI pue ‘re][e 
ay} OF urese os eu ‘peydute oq sorTeyO 
to dng ysiy oy} reqje ‘qsettg oy} ‘uoTunUt 
“U0 oY} oYe} Op yeyy Woy} 10F Ysnous oq 10 
Vous JOU YOP 9}e1O9SUOD pUe PAMOTTeY OUT 
oy} yey} ‘esouryo Os Yop 4I Fr yey ‘oqoN 


120 


Surjeouy oures oy} yo yso[ : onsua gio 
qystm uorunuuog ATOY eT} gnoqe YorqaA 
‘Iap1ostp pue uoyvurjord oy} proav 07 pue 
‘ToATooer AYJAIOM OYJ OFUN UALS “YsIIyQ Jo 
Syyouseq ey} JO SULSpoyMouyoe ~uJoyeAs pue 
s[quIny oy} JO UOTVOYTUSIS v TOF ‘yUROUT [TOM 
SuIOq SUIy} YORAM : uorunwMUM0D ATO oy 
PATOL PTMOYS SUT[ooUy s}uvoruNUMMOD oyy 
yey} ‘toddng s,pio'T oy} Jo uorjersturmpe 
ey} ur ‘toAvad uowuods Fo yooq oy} 
UL PoeUlepIO ST 4T SvoLey A, ‘ouTeS oT Op 04 
SUTT[IM 9M orOJoIOYY : LUMV Uayey og plnoys 
sooueyo ‘eq Avur ATJUOTUeATOD se YouuT 
os 4eq} ‘yQeT[IM Aqtreyo ATroyZOIq osnvoeq 
yok puy :qaed Suoim ev ut peyoidtoy ur 
pue ‘poverdep ‘ponsysuoostut ‘Lovurysqo pue 
sole Jo osjo Io ‘AytuAyUT pue oourroUST 
Toy} IOF soya ‘ouos Fo oq Avut 4r ynq 


pestep ATyo0j.10d os oq ued 1opz0 OU YSnoyLy 


“pred oq 03 otmry yeyy 4e pure ueq} 
‘onp Ajqvuojsnooe ‘sornp [BOTYSVISETODO 
Tre wry sto wey 0; ded pue ‘seyndep 
to Aqndep «ey Io ‘sty 10 ‘oye IO ‘IVOTA 
‘UoSIvT STU YI UOYoor [[VYs ToUoTYStregT 
Arora ‘royseq ye Apteok puy *poqurodde 
yooq = SIq} UL Jepio oY 0} SurproooR 
‘SOUT TOYO pure ‘syUSTIBIORY oY} OATODOI OsTe 
TTeys pue : oo 0q 04 LoyseM ‘Orta Jo : rvok 
OY} UL SOUT} 9oITY JSVOT OY] 4” ‘oJVOTUNUTUTOD 


lleqs deuolusueg Areas yey} ‘ojou puy |b 


GST 


“uAAY, YL OFVOTUMUTUIOD TILA yey4 OUOS 
envy oy oydooxe ‘uorunuIMIOg oY} eyeIGeTeO 
0} olvoqIOF [[VYS olep oyoM oY} UO 4SoIIG 
oy} puy ‘owes oy. s0¥ poyudodde esrp.s0 
onp pue secrryns yy [ye YIM ‘sortaqstur 
Ajoy pue ysty os ostudmofos AtSurpr00 
-O8 O1eUL “WII YIM o}VOTUNUTUIOD 03 tos 
sorrmye Sutdney «oqSTUL_, ot} sourouT sy 
Aq puy “uotunumog oy} enteded ashmoxy AT 
leys ‘oyunes0y, posodstp ATpoH usyy oq 
OYA “Toyyo [[B ‘ UoTuntAMOg 943 Jo sesxeyo 
oy} e1yO OS Joop oYM wey Io uA YT 
puy ‘oquowretoeg oy9 Jo sudntooor ory4I0M 
94} 0} Sonjoeseyy esodstp o10f10y} oreut pue 
“‘qqouuod osimoo roy uot ‘arojoq OMOUS, 
Soy} yeyy IOJ ‘Toop 103390q oY oq AvUT oYOIyA 
oy} + oOjSeg of YIIM wUoruntiUI0g ATOY 
OU} ONTEdaL [[VYS ‘WEY TOF Too 0} eptnoad 
[eys Ao} WoYA rey}O OOS IO ‘orUNMAMOg 
oy} JO socIeYyO oY} OF LoYo 07 yyoudaz10dde 
{I ‘opeur ULoLey soUNUTpIO YY I0IJe osM09 
Aq oumoyar 07 oystreg Aono ut ssnoy 4eyy jo 
4Se9] OY 4¥ OO BtHOY : AoI]ZUNOD OY UI eporqe 
e1oyMm Aono penresqo osje coq eur oures 
oUF FU} PUY “YJOIYSIuTUT yey o4soltg oyy 
UFIAL OPBOIUNTUTMO OUIOS SeTRATe PeYS o1oyy 
‘soyomnyQ oyeLsorjog pue [ferpoyyeg [ye uy 
:OyoIMYyY senrytud oy} Jo oSvsn ayy 07 pue 
‘FOIOYY UOTONITSUT OY} 09 a[qveISV sour oq 
Avu 4stiyg Jo pnorq pue Apoq pesseTq 944 
JO JUOWIVLOVY OY} JO SuUINTEdoI oy 4VYy ‘osTy 


6PST 


121 


“auly OUO 
ye ouo UT uUeYyy soov[d o10uWL Ut oq 0} ‘Apoq 
[eInyeu oni} sysIyO JO WyQnI4 oy} ysurese 
SI JI 10g ‘oloy you pue ‘ueAvey UT oe 
Koy} “ystayQ IMOTABY MO Jo poojq pure Apoq 
[einjzeu oy} SuLu1E0N00 Se puy ‘suRTySTINQ, 
[NJUITeF [Te JO portoyqe oq 07 AryR[OpyT o19M 
4ey} Loy ‘perope oq you Avur o10joreyy pure 
‘soounjsqns (einjzeu AIOA ITOY} UL TIS UTeMet 
Koy} ‘oura pue preiq yeyuoMBIOVs soy 
SulUIANUOD SV IO] “poor pue YSoy yemyeu 
sgslyQ jo Sureq e194} soueseid jeuosso 
pue yeot Aue 0} 10 ‘poatooor A[Ipoq o.x0T]} 
dUIA. IO pRoId [e}USUVIOVS oY} OJUN JLoy}IO 
‘quop 0q 0} 4Y.dNO IO ‘euOp st UOTeIOpe Aue 
yey ‘Aqotoy} JUBOUT JOU ST 4I Fey} oIVLOOp 
Op OM ‘ASTAIOTIO UO} IO JYSNOYy oq yULSTUE 


‘purely s4seltg oy} 7e ‘syynout ateyy ut Apoq 
SYSLtyQ Jo yUoUTBLOVY IY} oATedeI ATMOUTUTOD 
ejdood ey} yueTueAMOO yyon0y} st WW 
‘MUpBaIT OTOY A. oY} JHoY.Sno1yy posn oq FYSrut 
Aqua1oFtun ue yeyy pue ‘poydureyyez oq prnoys 
Joyeoroy Suryy yons Aue ysoy : ssaupexorM 
pue uomysiodns 07 yt posnqe ATSIOATp 
pue ‘ureyy yytM 41 4doy ‘Aeme ATJoLIOES ouTeS 
oyy possauod sow, Auvut Loy} Sv TONUISeLOF 
qoX :AreIQUOD OY} 0} YSTAYQ Jo yuowpuUeUT 
-U100 OU pu ‘spuRy UMO ATE} UL ASTI Jo 
Apog oy} Jo yUoUIVIONY oT] spuRY Sysetrg otf} 
qe poatooor ‘qsvd savod Aurvur ‘ojdood oy yeyy 
‘SToqIIM JUSLOUe UL pvot oq 4L Yonoyjye puy 


“qUETUONTOO 
ous (UOTOeTOSIp SIqY 0} sSudApaooor) 
aspnt TRoNseIsepooy oy} 07 TTeYS sv ‘yuoUT 
-oystund eyo o1FNs LO ‘a}VOLUNTAIOOXS 9aq 
0} OUTBOX, OY} JO SOMRT T[FOT|SVISOPOOW yy 
Aq ‘yooroyy oyord uodn :sonjesey} ordnooo 
eyomnyo eysueg oy} ur ATposun yyeop 
10 ‘sonposumoy} yuesqe WOOP ‘osnvVod ysuI OU 
uodn ApSsuAT[IM LoneosoyM puy ‘poyudsodde 
eyood sity ur ‘soyIT pure sozuouBIoRg 
JoyjO [eV oye} pure ‘onkooort 0} o19y} pue 
‘Gene, oy} ye oxvod OU] UT OOO oFOTUNUTULOD 
0} ‘soljonp tte} ored 0} oLoyy, “Sonposuroyy 
aldno00 0} ‘UOTORJIpoUL puB ooUETIS eATPOH 
ro ‘rokvid ynonop YIM o1ey} pue ‘yuep 
-Isort oq oY} OLA OYOINYO oYsLeg oyy ut 
‘g0mMIOS IUINIP OY ¥v 9q pu oTvey OF punod 
oq 0} evumoOM puke urut AJono ‘oL1oWOYM YL 


THE EVIDENTIAL VALUE OF THE RUBRICS 


IN 


THE LITURGIES OF EDWARD VL., AND SPECIALLY 


IN THE BOOK OF 1549. 


Prima facie a Rubric is a direction to the minister or to those 
ministered to, describing, limiting, and illustrating the form of 
ministry to which it is appended, and nothing more. 

But the Rubrics of the English Prayer Book, especially in its 
earlier editions, are largely inspired with another and totally 
different intention. They form, indeed, valuable evidence of the 
animus of those who inserted them, their silence being often as 
eloquent as their utterance, and their absence as significant as 
their presence, and for the following reason: they are explana- 
tory of chanyes from former established usages, and specially 
changes by way of simplification and diminution. So far as 
their statements go, the Rubrics may be perhaps most con- 
veniently divided into three classes— 


(a) Those which proscribe (explicitly) ; 
(b) Those which prescribe (explicitly) ; 
(c) Those which describe (explicitly). 


But beyond this, as will be seen, they both proscribe and pre- 
scribe implicitly, and by their silence leave an inference as 
strong, or stronger, than any statement. 

First, with regard to the descriptive Rubrics. They are 
mostly very short, somewhat vague, and, so far as they are 
counted directions for the performance of Divine Service, 
imperfect. This, however, is by no means the case with all of 
them. ‘lhere are certain descriptive Rubrics as full or fuller 
than any to be found in the Modern Roman Missal. Such are 
of only one sort, vez., those that describe objects, usages, or 
ceremonies of Divine Service of a contentious or sary 
nature. ~ ‘hese will be noticed shortly. 


123 


The short and meagre Rubrics of direction and description 
are such as these— 


For Mattins, 
Lhe Priest being in the Quire shall begin. 
At the Lord’s Supper, 
The Priest standing humbly afore the midst of the Altar, shail say. 


At Baptisms, 
The God Lathers ... . must be ready at the Church Door, 
At Marriages, 
The persons to be murried shall come into the bedy of the Church. 


At Visitation of the Sick, 


The Priest entering into the Sick Person’s house shall say. 


At a Churching, 
The woman shall kneel... . nigh unto the quire door, and the 
Priest standing by her . . 


At a Funeral, 
The Priest meeting the Corpse at the Church style... . 


At the Commination, 
The Priest shall go into the Pulpit. 


In the case of nearly every Service it is supposed to be a 
sufficient direction to the officiant to tell him where he is to 
begin the Service, and to leave him thenceforward to move and 
stand after “ the accustomed manner,” 

And this is the more clear from the consideration of the first 
rubric of the Lord’s Supper. It was needful to describe the 
position at the Lord’s prayer and collect since they were not the 
beginning of the Latin Mass. 

Or at Mattins, being in the choir, he is to begin with the 
Lord’s Prayer directly and simply without “ invocation.” 

When, however, a Rubric is lengthy and descriptive, it is 
because it has to describe something neither wholly old nor 
entirely new, but greatly altered from its original form. In this 
regard the 1549 Rubric as to the Bread is specially noteworthy. 

It is to be unleavened, round, without device, thicker than 
before, and larger in diameter, to be divided into two or three, 


and so given. .... 
The fulness of this description is with obvious intention. 


124, 


The Rubric of the 1548 Order of Communion simply said 
that the bread was to be such as heretofore, but broken every one 
in two pieces at the least. 

The former Rubric was defensive as against those who would 
abolish the old bread, but to emphasize the Communion and to 
minimize the Priest’s individual oblation, not his Host only, but 
each of the people’s breads was to be broken. 

The 1549 Rubric goes further, and doing away with the 
Print, and making all the wafers large, reduces the Communion 
of the Faithful to a more uniform level. 

It is needless to do more than refer to the shortness of the 
rubric on this matter in the Book of 1552: 


To take avay the superstition... . it shall suffice that the bread be such 
as is uswal to be eaten at the table . 


No “ description ”’ beyond this is needed. 

The Rubrics descriptive of the preliminary conditions and 
regulations for Communion, as the final rubrics as to celebration, 
number of recipients, &c., are full and ample. They need not, 
however, be here discussed in detail. It is enough to point out 
that they evidence the necessity felt by the framers thereof to 
be very explicit in describing the new usages and obligations, 
and, equally ‘‘ inevitable” to those who should wish to revert to 
older customs. 

That sach a desire was felt, and strongly felt, is shown by the 
demands of the Devonshire rioters! who demanded fiercely that, 
except at Haster, no one should be allowed to communicate at 
Mass! 


The final Rubric in the preliminary group is_ specially 
noticeable. 

The ‘‘vesture appointed” is at first sight simply the old 
vesture of the Celebrant ; but a slight examination will show 
that this is not the case. Had it been so the Rubric might and 
would have ended here, but ‘he shall put upon him a_ white 
albe plain.” (a) The Rubric forbids the use of coloured 
albs, or those made of silk or velvet or cloth of gold; and (b) it 
shall be plain—i.e., without apparels of embroidery or precious 


1 See Southey’s ‘‘ Book of the Church.” 


125 


stuff.1 Moreover, ‘‘He shall have a vestment or cope.” This 
might be interpreted as an indifferent alternative, but a glance 
at one of the final Rubrics dispels this view. ‘On Wednesdays 
and Fridays ... . the Priest shall put upon him a plain albe 
or surplice, with a cope, and say all things... .” Here there 
can be little doubt, if any, of the meaning of the Rubric and its 
fulness. 

The details of the ‘plain albe”’ and the alternative use of 
“*a cope’’ with albe or surplice, when there is no consecration, 
describe changes from the old order ; and without such special 
direction the new use would have been obscure. 

The nature of the cope or vestment as to colour or texture is 
left undecided. There can, therefore, be no doubt that the old 
vestments retained were in use. Nor, I think, can it be reason- 
ably argued that the “ vestment ”’ did not include its full suit of 
stole and maniple, just as the albe would naturally include the 
amice, and, especially, the girdle.? 

Notice again the lengthy Rubrics at the offertory. Not 
elaborate ritual directions, but such as are called for by the New 
Order. 

The ‘ Offertory’’ Sentences, the collection, the placing of 
the communicants, the moving out of the chancel of other 
worshippers, and the placing on the Altar of the fair and con- 
venient cup, etc.; all these details need description, and 
receive it. 

Notice, lastly, the Rubrics as to the distribution of the Sacra- 
ment, the reception by the assistants, their subsequent ministry 
in distribution, and the words of administration. All these are 


1 See, also, Ordination of Deacons: ‘‘ Every one of them shall have 
upon him a plain albe.” 

2 This is, however, not to be absolutely taken for granted. The frontis- 
piece to Melancthon’s Forme Precationum Piarum, 1563, shows a priest and 
deacon communicating the Protestants of Wittenberg, and, though the 
alb of the chief minister is presumably girded, no stole or maniple is worn. 
‘On the other hand, too much stress cannot be laid on the evidential value 
of pictures and prints, or it would be concluded the maniple was often 
worn on the right arm, for so it is shown in Titian’s San Sebastian, and 
also in Rubens’ Ignatius Loyola, 


126 


full and particular.! Descriptive in the best sense of the word, 
and for the reason above stated, they are descriptive of new 
usages, and therefore necessary. 

If the Rubrics of Direction are examined in so far as they 
prescribe or proscribe any ceremonial act (or omit to do so), a 
general and consistent principle will be found to inspire them. 

Their fulness or meagreness, their absence or presence, are 
not to be attributed either to carelessness or caprice, but simply 
owe their form and presence to the operation of the principle 
alluded to, and this is that Rubrics were inserted in the Service 
only where they were deemed necessary. 

And this is specially to be borne in mind with regard to the 
vesture of the Priest and his assistants. Had there been no 
change, it is safe to say there had been no Rubric. The Altar 
was vested and ‘‘ clothed” as afore; the ornaments, save the 
Hanging Pyx [where that existed ],? the position and use of them, 
all remained unaffected by the translation of the Mass into 
English ; therefore nothing was here needed. Whatever had 
been altered up to this point had been altered by foregoing 
injunctions. 

If we now examine the Rubrics in order we shall be able to 
see the working of this principle. 


(1) 

The Lord’s Prayer is to be said with the Collect for Purity, 
in the place and after the manner of the old ‘ Preparation ”’ 
before the steps of the Altar. There is no Psalm Judica, no 
Confiteor,? but simply this short prelude, to be said (privately, I 
believe) by the Priest. 


1 Note, however, a serious omission. 7o hint is given as to the 
time of the fraction of the people’s breads... . . This is without question 
an oversight. Even on the assumption that all the breads were 
broken, in the accustomed manner before the Paa, it should have been 
stated. 

2 The Pyx was by no means universal. The ‘‘Fardel of Fashions,” a 
book published in 1555, says: ‘* At the right hand of the high Altar there 
should be an almorie, either cut in the wall or framed upon it, in the 
which... . the Sacrament of the Lord’s Body, the holy oil for the sick 

. always to be locked.” ; 

: # N.B.—No Confiteor, because the priest joins in the General Confession 
before his own Communion. ° 


127 


It would seem from the previous Rubric that the Introit, 
when sung, was being gone through by the choir meanwhile. 


(2) 

When there was no choir the Priest would say (in the 
accustomed manner) a Psalm ‘“ appointed for the Introit ” after 
his preparation, which Psalm ended, the Priest shall say the 
Kyrie. 

Here the wording is luminous to a degree: (a) It is a whole 
Psalm (not a verse or two), (b) it is appointed for the Introit, 
(c) directly the Psalm is finished, the Kyrie is to follow. 

The significance of this is seen by turning to the Introits 
themselves. After the Introit for the First Sunday in Advent is 
written : 

‘* And so must every Introit be ended.” 


Not simply must the Gloria follow the Psalm, but the 
Introit must end here, without repetition of the verses. Hence 
it is directed that the ‘‘ Psalm is ended.” 

The Kyrie is said or sung without further note or direction. 

No place, or position, or posture is mentioned for either 
Introit or Kyrie. 

No one needed any direction, both Priests and Clerks had all 
their lives been familiar with the use of their Church. 


(3) 

The Priest intones the Gloria in Excelsis ‘‘ standing at God’s 
Board,”’ and then leaves it to the Clerks to finish. 

Here, I think, we may see a reason for the fulness of the 
rubric [which might be taken as contradicting the principle 
already enunciated]. 

It was necessary the settle how many words of the Hnglish 
Translation should be accounted as the Intonation. In all other 
respects the Gloria might have been left described as in our 
present book... . ‘‘either sung or said.”’ 


(4) 
The Rubrics to the Collects are significant. 
_ The first Rubric speaks of the Collect for the day with one 


of these two. 


128 


Here is introduced a new rule. The Collects at the Com- 
munion are not to be three or five (an uneven number in any 
ease), but normally two oniy. If this be doubted look at the 
Rubric for Good Friday, and there it is directed that 


‘© After the ‘* Zwo Collects of the Communion,” shall be said these two 
collects following. 


Otherwise we may be sure it would have been thought 
enough to say, ‘‘ Then shall follow the Collects, first of the day, 
and after for the King,” or words to that effect. 

The second Rubric (or direction), ‘‘ Priest: Let us pray,” 
placed before the Collect for the King, is, however, still more 
noteworthy, because it is omitted in some editions |e.g. Grafton’s 
of Mar. VIII.]. Omitted (without the slightest doubt) as being 
unnecessary, since the second Collect of the Mass naturally had 
the oremus, though not the dominus vobiscum. 

The absence of any rubrical prescription for the termination 
of the Collects is most important. The Collect for First 
Sunday in Advent ends fully and “in the accustomed manner,’ 
but in no other single case is the Collect fully completed. That 
for Easter Day has Amen, and that for Whitsun Day has the 
complete ending (less Amen), and all others are more or less 
incomplete ; they end, for instance, abruptly, ‘ through Jesus 
Christ” ; or “ who livest and reignest, etc.”?; and the Collect 
for Second Sunday after Trinity has an ending which absolutely 
demands previous knowledge. 

«, ... Thy steadfast love... . grant this,” etc. 


(5) 

The Rubric to the Epistle shows intention. 

The Gospel shall follow immediately, that is to say, no Gradual, 
Sequence, Alleluia, or Tract shall intervene. It might be supposed 
that the Dominus Vobiscum was to be also omitted, but this, I 
think, need not be inferred, since the Gospel in the Baptismal 
service has it, though not the Gloria tibi. 

That omission here is not prohibition may be gathered from 
the fact that the Gloria before the Gospel has survived its 
omission in Edward’s II. Book, and every successive edition and 
revision till the present day. 


129 


The Response after the Gospel does not appear, but this too 
has survived in many a parish. The silence of the Rubric in the 
matter of the Gradual is clearly proscriptive, but in the other 
cases it is no more than would be expected. 

“« After the Gospel ended’’. . . . is certainly a very different 
prescription than ‘immediately after the Epistle ended.” 

No direction is given as the place of the Gospel Minister. 
Surely this indicates that the varying use of North side of Altar 
or Rood-loft (or Pulpit) was left undisturbed. 


(6) 

The Priest shall begin: I believe. Here, as in the case of 
the Gloria in excelsis, there is a reason for marking the English 
equivalent of the Intonation. 

(7) 

The succeeding Rubrics need no comment, until we reach the 
one that directs the placing of the Elements upon the Altar. 

The Bread is laid either on the Corporas or the Paten. Clearly, 
according to the number of the communicants: the laying of the 
One Host “upon the Corporas”’ would not meet the case, nor 
perhaps would the Paten suffice ; wherefore, as in the case of 
the Chalice or some fair and convenient cup (if the Chalice will not 
serve) the Rubric is elastic and permissive. It must depend on 
circumstances in each celebration how the Priest is to prepare, 
and on what vessels he possesses. 

Note that no directions whatever are given as to whence the 
bread, wine, or water are to be brought, nor who shall bring 
them. The new Rubric goes just so far as is needed, but no 
further. Neither flagon nor cruet nor wafer-canister nor 
credence are so much as hinted at. 


(8) 

The Prefaces are introduced with a Rubric of which nothing 
need be said, but the Rubric before the canon is needed, since the 
invitation, ‘‘ Let us pray for the whole state of Christ’s Church,” 
ig a new and unaccustomed address, and the turning to the 
people must be ordered, or it would not occur.! 


1 Note also the necessity of the words ‘‘ Plainly and distinctly.” 
K 


130 


With regard to the marginal directions and [K] signs, 
Here the Prrest must take, etc. I venture to think that they are 
inserted for a double reason—(a) as a necessary minimum of 
manual action to the celebrant, to whom, as to others,! ‘ cross- 
ing, holding up of hands, knocking upon the breast, and other 
gestures’ were left open; but (2) as a note to the worshippers 
that this was done at the time, especially as the old and venerated 
elevation was abandoned. 

The Order of Communion gives this proscription a3 a final 
note—without any levation. This refers to the second or third 
consecration of the Chalice. The rubric of 1549 gives the same 
prohibition more fully and inclusively. 


(9) 
Then shall the Priest say. Does this mean without any 
further secret prayers? Probably. 


(10) 
Here occurs the first really important change of Ritual 
between the Order of Communion and the First Book of 1549. 
The turning to the people, the Confession and Absolution, 
and so forth, precede the Priest’s Communion instead of following 
it, as before. This change involves three directions. 


(@) | Then shall the Priest first receive the Communion in both kinds 
himself. 


(6) Inthe Communion time the Clerk shall sing, O Lamb of God. . 


(c) | Where there are no Clerks there the Priest shall say all things 
appointed for them. .... 


For the Aynus Dei, being the prelude ta Communion, must, 
in the translators’ opinion, be sung rathe: ior the people than 
the Priest. 

But if there are no singers, what becomes of the Agnus Dei ? 
The Priest could not say it in the ‘“* Communion time,” since he 
is saying other words. But he must say it. There is nothing 
Jeft for him to do but to say it before his own Communion and 
not in its old place after the ‘“ Peace of the Lord be always with 
you.”’ 


1 See Chapter of Ceremonies. 


131 


This change alone is answerable for the lengthy and detailed 
prescription, which is perhaps the most definite in the whole 
Service. 


(11) 

The rubrics relating to the Confession, Absolution, and so 
forth are indeed fairly full, though no change had taken place in 
their use since 1548, but this involves no contradiction of the 
guiding law of necessity, since they are simply imported bodily 
and without change from the Order of Communion, in the 
framing of which the said law did operate.! 

The one change from this order is the double address to the 
communicants and the withdrawal of the impenitent in the 
earlier order. 

The first of these addresses is here omitted, because of the 
earlier caution, inserted now after the Creed. 


(12) 


© Then shall the Priest give thanks to God inthe narne of all them . . 


Here, again, a rubric is necessary to preface an entirely new 
form of “ post-Communion.” 

Heretofore the Post-Communion Oollect might or might not 
have reference to the Communion of the Faithful, but in this 
Service it is this, and this only, that is in mind. 


1 Rather, perhaps, we may conclude that the rubric of 1549 is the 
original, since the whole Service was in preparation before the 1548 order 
of Communion was imposed, though it was not ripe for publication. 


132 


Having briefly commented on the rubrics of the Liturgy of 
1549, it may not be necessary to say much more to impress their 
significance ; but a few words may be added by way of summary. 


Me 


It is indisputable that the Rubrics, whether full or scanty, 
are not inserted with anything but intention. We may approve 
or not, we may regard or elect to disregard the animus imponentis, 
but it is there. 


i. 


It is clear that the Rubrics are not intended to be exhaustive 
or complete, nor are they written for ‘‘ unlearned or ignorant ”’ 
men, but to presumably ‘‘ discreet and learned” ministers who 
had been all their lives familiar with the performance of Divine 
Service. Among many other ‘“ undirected” actions and posi- 
tions are— 


(a) The movement of the Priest to the Altar from his first 
station humbly afore the midst of it. 


(b) His position at the Collect, the Gospel, the Creed, and 
every part of the Service, except (by inference) the 
centre of the Altar at the Canon (and the Gloria). 


(c) His actions are entirely undescribed; save the putting 
of the bread... . on the Altar, his touching the 
oblations, and his signing [them ?] and his turning to 
the people. 


(d) The position of the Communicants and their posture. 
(ce) The condition of the Altar and its furnishing. 


(f) The consumption of the Elements after Communion, ete. 
. etc ‘ 


133 
III. 


The incompleteness of the Rubrics, however, and the mere 
acknowledgment that some previous or independent informa- 
tion is necessary for the performance of service, does not 
constitute their significance in this regard. 

Nor does the note at the end of the chapter on ceremonies 
touch the root of the question. 

We may most confidently conclude that, It is not simply 
that it was left open to ‘‘every man’s devotion” in all matters 
to please himself how he performed his service, though doubtless 
a good deal might be said in favour of this view. 

If the Rubries of 1548, 1549, and 1552 be placed side by 
side we cannot evade the conviction. That whether for good 
or evil, the framers of these rubrics intended to leave alone what 
they approved of, and to alter what they objected to. 

This principle indeed they have clearly enunciated, but as 
acts are more convincing than words, we should rather look at 
the rubrics themselves for light. And this is what we find— 

Where the form of the service is changed there is a new 
rubric ; 

Where the change is slight the Rubric is short and simple ; 
but in proportion as the change is great in form, or great in 
“« contentious ”’ importance there the Rubric is full and lengthy, 
or, at least, clear and incisive. 

There is no concealment or mystery about the words of the 
service; ‘‘ plainly and distinctly,” or ‘“‘ with a loud voice,” is 
enough to do away with this. 

There is no “superstitious or ungodly” representation on 
the bread, nor any elevation or lifting liable to misconception. 

There is to be no processional save the Litany, no gradual, 
nor any offertory sentence or communion of dubious theology. 
But this being said, what more is there to say ? 


IV, 


It is not conceivable that on June 9th, 1549, any of the 
acts, gestures, modes of performing of any ceremony in the 
Lord’s Supper, were rendered illegal, or deemed unseemly which 


134 


on the previous Sunday were duly, rightly, and orderly performed 
(according to the order of Communion then in force), unless 
specifically condemned or forbidden. 

Bearing in mind that the professed object of the Liturgy of 
1549 was to order and settla the worship of the English Church, 
and not merely to ‘‘ patch up a peace” ad interim, we cannot 
suppose that any usage would remain unforbidden if it was deemed 
worthy of censure. 

That the men who ruled that the wafer should be a trifle 
“ thicker and larger ’”’ in circumference should so decree on the 
‘infinitely little,” and at the same time pass over the burning 
of incense and the use of lights and crucifix in absolute silence, 
if they intended to abolish them, passes human understanding.1 


aes 


The silences of Edward VI.’s Second Book are, on the other 
hand, to be easily explained on historical grounds, which 
grounds do not exist in the case of the First Book. 

The silence as to lights, incense, and gestures (crossing, &c.), 
does not imply approval, but rather the fact of all such things 
(or nearly all) having ceased between 1550 and 1552. Such a 
‘‘Down grade’’ is, I believe, unprecedented, and never repro- 
duced in any religious or irreligious movement on record. It 
is amply sufficient to account for the changed siynificance of 
rubrical silence. 

The few prescriptive and proscriptive Rubrics which are new 
in the 1552 Service are, however, so plain as to leave no doubt 
of their meaning, and the few eloquent marks of silence are, alas 
equally plain. 

‘‘No vestment, no cope, nothing but a surplice only.” 
Silence as to incense or lights does not imply approval, but lack 
of need to speak. ‘The Table shall have a fair linen cloth.” 
This, indeed, is needed ; otherwise, the Altar being gone and a 
mean table in the nave substituted, there would likely have been 
nothing but a bare board left. 


1Surely the Rubric as to the ‘placing the bread and wine upon the 
altar,” for instance, would have continued without any censing or mashing 
of the hands, or some such words. ° 


135 


ae 


Lastly it may be said, if in 1552 silence instead of approval 
meant omission, why not now ? 


To which the one and sufficient answer is, We are referred 
back for all things to the second year of Edward VI. 

As Elizabeth, who could not (if she would) alter the wording 
of Edward’s II. Book, yet inserted this saving Clause, so, in 
1662, even more inevitably was it re-enforced that for all the 
adornment, the ornamentation of the Service, the year (called 
the second year) 1549 should be the rule and standard.! 


ERNEST GELDART. 


1 That the II. Year refers to the I. Book may be gathered from the 
following facts :— 

(a) The Article of Elizabeth’s reign not only refers to ‘‘ the II. Year 
of Edward VI.” as the Ornaments Rubric of her Prayer Book 
does, but also mentions ‘‘ the Rites of that Book.” 

(b) It has been objected that the Rubric of 1559 could not have so 
misrepresented the date 1549 (which is really the III. Year), 
because the interval of time was so short that such forgetful- 
ness was impossible. But if we turn to the Act of Uniformity, 
Edward V1., 5 and 6, attached to the II. Book, we find the 
Previous Act therein referred to, not as Edward VI., 2 and 3, 
but, exactly in the same terms, it is described ‘as of the 
II. Year. ‘‘The like foresaid book, entitled, the Book of 
Common Prayer . . . . as by the Act of Parliament made 
in the Second Year of the King’s Majesty’s reign Ae 

(c) In the Rubric of Elizabeth, in the XXXVI. Article, ene in the 
II. Act of Uniformity (as in the Rubric of 1662), we are 
yeferred to the II. Year of Edward VI., and in two instances 
of the three the I. Book and the II. Year are undoubtedly 
taken as equivalent. 


137 


mie EN XO: 


BVO CASES ILLUSTRATIVE OF~ THE PER- 
MANENCE OF ACCUSTOMED USAGES IN 
EEE SEeNGLISH CHURCH, 


I. The changing of the Christian name at Confirmation isa 
usage of the English Church which has persisted, though there 
is no mention of it in the Book of Common Prayer. 

A constitution of Archbishop Peckham provided in 1281 as 
follows :— 


Attendant etiam sacerdotes ne lasciva nomina que scilicet 
mox prolata sonent in lasciviam imponi permittant parvulis 
baptizatis sexus precipue feminini; si contrarium fiat per 
confirmantes episcopos corrigatur. 

Lyndwood, Provinciale iii. 24. Gibson, Codex i. 363 (XVIILI., vi.) 
See also Pupilla Oculi vii. 


The permanence of this is thus attested by Lord Coke :— 


“If a man be baptized by the name of Thomas, and after at 
his confirmation by the byshop he is named John, he may 
purchase by the name of his confirmation. And this was the 
case of Sir Francis Gowdye, chief Justice of the Court of 
Common Pleas, whose name of baptism was Thomas and his 
name of confirmation Francis: and that name of Francis by 
the advice of all the Judges in Anno 36 H. 8 he did bear, and 
after used in all his purchases and grants.” 


I. Inst. p. 3 (London, 1670). 


138 


Drs Burn! contended that the alteration in the Service 
by which the Bishop no longer pronounces the candidate's 
name at Confirmation had invalidated this Canon and that 
therefore Lord Coke’s argument was not defensible. But it 
was acted on in 1707 by the Bishop of Lincoln acting under 
the advice of legal authorities based upon Coke’s dictum, as 
Bishop White Kennett has recorded. See Maskell, Monu- 
menta I. Dissertation on the Occasional Offices, §5 (1st ed., pp. 
CCXVi:-ccxix.; 2nd ed., cclx.-cclxiv.). 

Moreover, later instances have occurred down to the present 
time. Phillimore quotes a case in 1886 from Notes and Queries, 
7th Series, ii., p. 77, in the diocese of Liverpool. See Ecclesias- 
tical Law, p. 518 (ed. 1895). 

The view that there was only liberty to alter undesirable 
names was taken by Bishop Scambler in Elizabeth’s reign, 
evidently on a strict interpretation of the constitution above 
mentioned, as the following letter shows :— 


‘¢ After my humble comendacons unto yo" honor premised 
These are to signifie unto you That whereas yo" honor and S* 
Ambrose Cave wrote unto me concerninge the changing of a 
name at the confirmacon I have lerned that I may not change 
usuall or comon names, but onlie strange and not comon; and 
further if the name be changed at Confiymacon it taketh effect 
but from the Confivmacon. And thus wishing yo" honor 
prosperous heath} I committ you to God, who ever preserve 
you. ffrom Peterborough this xxvth of Maie 1563. 


Yo" honors to commaund, 


EDMUNDE PETRIBURG.”’ 


Brit. Mus. MS. Lans. 6, f. 127 (Burghley Papers, 1562-3). 


The custom has thus been perpetuated, though it is not 
provided for in the Prayer Book, and Scambler’s letter is an 
interesting example of the attitude of an Elizabethan Bishop 
to the old ecclesiastical law. 


II, The dress of a woman at her churching gives an 
example of a custom, not expressly laid down in the Prayer 


4 Eccl, Law, ii, 10 (London, 1842). 


139 


Book, being not only tolerated but enforced by ecclesiastical 
and civil courts alike. 


‘In the reign of King James I. an order was made by the 
Chancellor of Norwich! that every woman who came to be 
churched should come covered with a white veil. A woman 
refusing to conform was excommunicated for contempt and 
prayed a prohibition alleging that such Order was not warranted 
by any Custom or Canon of the Church of England. The 
judges desired the opinion of the Archbishop of Canterbury 
who convened divers Bishops to consult thereupon; and they 
certifying that it was the ancient usage of the Church of 
England for women who came to be churched to come veiled, 
a prohibition was denied.” 


Gibson Codex i. 373 (XVIII. xii.) quoting Palmer 296, 
Burn lic, i; 318. 


The case as reported by Sir Gefrey Palmer is as follows :— 


Les Reports de Siy Gefrey Palmer, p. 296 (London, 1678). 
Eliz. Shipden’s case vevs. Dr. Redman, Chancellor de Norwich. 

Le Chancellor de Norwich fait un Ordinance et ceo publish 
en Norwich que chescun feme que vient al Esglise d’estre 
Churched apres Childe bearing solonque le Ley d’Esglise 
de Angliterre viendra coverd ove an white vayle; Et le dit 
Eliz. Shepden esteant admonish de ceo refuse luy conformer : 
sur que contempt fuit excommunicate; Et un certificate fait 
de ceo al Chancery; sur quoi un breve de excommunicato 
capiendo fait d’estre agard vers lay et pro ceo prebenter et 
d’estre assayled el pria un Prohibition per motion de Serjeant 
Otto in B. R. alledging que est un novel Ley nient allowed per 
ascun Custome on Canon on auter Ley de Esglise de Angliterre ; 
et dit que est prerogative de cest Court mayntainer freedome 
de Subjects del forreigne innovations et concluder chescun court 
deins lour bounds; Mes il offer al Court que si soet ascun 
Custom ou Ley d’Esglise d’Angliterre que ceo command que 
sa Clyent ceo wil obey ; Mes quia fuit novel case que ferra un 


1 Other cases of insistence upon the veil in 1613 and 1636 are quoted in 
Hale’s Precedents and Proceedings in Criminal Causes, pp. 237, 2259. (London, 
1847.) 


140 


president les Judges desire d’aver le resolution de Archevesque 
de Canterbury ; et in convene touts les Evesques que fueront al 
London; et il meme et 6 auter Evesques resolve & certify que 
fuit le ancient Custome de Esglise de Angleteyve, que femes 
viendront vailed al Esglise d’estre churched ; et cest resolution 
fuit declared per Leo C. Justice in Court ; Et sur ceo le Prohibi- 
tion denyed d’estre granted. 

There is thus a tradition in favour of the veil so strong that 
though it finds no place in the Prayer Book, it has been enforced 
by ecclesiastical and civil courts. The veil is not now generally 
worn, but if it were thought desirable to revive the custom, it 
is difficult to see that anyone would be justified in objecting on 
the ground that no provision is made for the veil in the rubric, 
though it only specifies that the woman shall be ‘“ decently 
apparelled.”’ 


W. H. FRERE. 


141 


pee ND TX EF, 


Assuming the censer to be an ornament in use by authority 
of Parliament in the second year of Edward VI., and so to be 
retained in use, there remains a question as to the time and 
manner of such use. The rubric speaks of the ornaments of 
the Ministers “at all times of their ministration.” These 
words are not grammatically connected with the “‘ ornaments 
of the Church”? among which we must include the censer; but 
it can hardly be doubted that any limitation which they imply 
ought to be extended to these equally with the ornaments of 
the Minister. The language of the rubric is loosely constructed, 
owing to the combination, effected in 1662, of the wording of 
the proviso to the Act of 1559 and that of the rubric of the 
same year. Reading it as a whole, it is clear that all ornaments 
alike are to be used at certain ‘times of ministration.” But 
this imposes a limitation. Ornaments are to be used in con- 
nection with ministration; they are adjuncts to ministration. 
But the ministration referred to must be such ministration as is 
ordered in the Book of Common Prayer, for none other is 
contemplated. Therefore, if there be no ministration ordered 
as an adjunct to which a certain ornament is to be used, then 
there is no use at all for such ornament. Even if it were 
among the ornaments generally referred to by the rubric, it is 
not specifically included in the order for their retention and 
use, but is rather excluded. 

On this ground the use of the censer has been objected to. 
There is no provision for its use in the rites of the Book of 
Common Prayer; there is no ministration to which it can 
serve as an adjunct. The use of it, therefore, involves an 


142 


additional ceremony, over and above those ordered by the 
prescript rite ; such additional ceremony is, to say the least, of 
doubtful lawfulness in itself, and certainly cannot be defended 
as implied by the Ornaments Rubric. 

I contend, in reply, that the use of the censer after the 
ancient manner is not an additional ceremony, but is an adjunct 
to a ceremony ordered by the Book of Common Prayer. It is 
indeed, pretty obvious that a censer might be used in such a 
way as to involve an additional ceremony; it might be used 
out of all reasonable connection with the order of Divine 
worship as prescribed, in such a way as to interrupt and 
obscure what is there contained. Such cases would undoubtedly 
call for the intervention of authority ; but the correction of this 
evil, should it arise, will call, I submit, not for the prohibition 
of the censer, but for the regulation of its use. I am concerned 
to show that there are ministrations provided in the Book of 
Common prayer which invite the use of the censer as a 
ceremonial adjunct. 

It is, I think, an accepted principle that in the great change 
produced by the reformation of the English service books all 
things were intended to be done after the former manner, except 
where they were, expressly or by implication, altered. The 
occasional reference to ‘‘custom”’ in the Prayer Book of 1549 
points to this, and so does the omission of several most 
necessary directions. The late Archbishop of Canterbury, in 
the Bishop of Lincoln’s case, decided for the use of the mixed 
chalice on this principle. It follows that when a ministration 
or ceremony, ordered in the unreformed service books, re- 
appears in the reformed rite, even if the details vary, we must 
regard it as the same ceremony continuously existing. Now in 
the unreformed services there were certain ceremonies to which 
the use of Incense after a certain manner was an ordinary 
adjunct. The precise meaning of the word ceremony, as used in 
this connection, has been much debated; more than one use 
appears to be legitimate ; I would explain that I use it here in 
the sense of something which ts to be done by the Minister as an 
integval part of the prescript order. ‘The censing was not a 
ceremony of this kind. It was never regarded as an integral 
part of-any service. The service could be performed, and in 


143 


practice would seem to have been most frequently performed, 
without it. Nor, even when performed, was it an action 
regarded in itself. It was in relation to something else, which 
actually was an integral part of the service. Thus the censing 
was not a ceremony apart, but was a ceremonial adjunct to 
certain of the prescribed ceremonies. 

I note some of these. Incense was used at the Altar, dur- 
ing the ancient Office of Lauds, while Benedictus was sung. It 
was used in the same manner at Evensong, while Magnificat was 
sung. Do these “times of ministration” till remain? I 
submit that the Divine Service ordered in the Book of Common 
Prayer is intended to be, and actually is, a continuation in a 
modified form of the older Servitinm Divinum, commonly known 
to us now as the Breviary Offices. The Preface to the Prayer 
Book ‘Concerning the Service of the Church” speaks plainly 
in this sense. If this be so the English Evensong must be taken 
as equivalent to the old Latin Vespevae, name and thing, and 
the saying or singing of Magnificat in one is the same “time 
of ministration’? as in the other. We have nothing now so 
precisely corresponding to the ancient Office of Lauds, but if we 
remember that before the reformation of the Services the 
Nocturns of the Breviary with Lauds and Prime were 
commonly said in parish churches all together, that this 
service as a whole was popularly known as Mattins, and 
that this same popular name continued in use for the 
reformed Morning Service, the conclusion is inevitable 
that Benedictus, as occurring in our rite, is the same 
“‘ ministration’ as the Benedictus of the ancient Lauds. These 
‘‘times of ministration” therefore survive, and I submit that 
the occasional use of Incense at these times, not as an integral 
ceremony, but as a ceremonial adjunct of what is prescribed to 


be done, is covered by the Ornaments Rubric. 


In the Order of the Mass censing took place at three 
several points: at the approach to the Altar, at the reading of 
the Gospel, and at the Offertory. I rely exclusively on the 
printed editions of the Sarum Missal, issued at various dates 
between 1487 and 1534, and again during the reign of Mary, 
1554 to 1557. These were published for general use, the 
reputation of the Church of Salisbury securing their acceptance 


144 


throughout the kingdom. They represent the ordinary use— 
subject to local variations of custom—of those parish churches 
which had the means of carrying out all their directions. The 
directions for the censing at the three points that [ have men- 
tioned are almost uniform in the various editions, and there can 
be no doubt that they were commonly followed. But I note in 
this connection a curious fact. About the year 1537 there was 
written a detailed explanation of the ceremonies of the Mass. 
A copy exists in the Cotton Collection at the British Museum 
(Cleop. E. 5, fol. 259). It is printed in Collier (Vol. v., pp. 110-117, 
ed. 1845). The object of the writer was clearly to instruct the 
people, whose minds were disturbed by the influx of new teach- 
ing, in the significance of the ceremonies with which they were 
familiar. The different parts of the rite are taken in detail; 
their purpose and connection are explained; but in the whole 
document there is no mention of Incense. It was certainly in 
common use; it might seem to invite comment more than 
many of the details which are explained. 1 think the omission 
can only be explained by the supposition that the censing was 
regarded, according to the distinction which I have drawn, not 
as an integral part of the ceremonies of the Mass, nor as an 
independent ceremony apart from the rest, but purely as an 
occasional ceremonial adjunct of those ceremonies which are 
actually described and explained. 

The three points at which the censing occurred, the three 
ceremonies to which it was an occasional adjunct, hold the 
same place in the reformed service. I will take them in order. 


i. The approach to the Altay. This was accompanied, in the 
old rite, by certain prayers, said privately by the priest and his 
attendant ministers, while the clerks sang the anthem and 
psalm known as Officium. In the course of these prayers the 
priest censed the Altar, and was himself censed by the deacon. 
He afterwards began the more public part of the service by 
chanting Gloria in excelsis, or, on days when that was not said, 
Dominus vobiscum, with the Collect following. 

The approach to the Altar is an obvious necessity, and by a 
natural instinct of reverence it is always done with some 
degree of solemnity, varying with the place and occasion. In 


145 


other words it is done ceremonially, or with ceremonial 
‘adjuncts. These adjuncts are not additional ceremonies ; they 
are adornments, if I may say so, of the ceremony of approach. 
This ceremony is not expressly provided for at all in the Book 
of Common Prayer. The first rubric assumes that the priest 
is already ‘standing at the north side of the Table.” But he 
has inevitably arrived there in a ceremonial manner, and his 
approach is accompanied by ceremonial acts, of however simple 
a character. It is a very common practice for him to kneel 
down and veil his face in private prayer as he approaches. 
This practice does not appear to be derived from any ancient 
usage ; it is due to an instinct of devotion. It is a ceremonial 
act, yet it would be abhorrent to common sense to describe it 
as an additional ceremony. It is part of a ceremony necessarily 
implied in the directions of the Book of Common Prayer. 
Others again, following more ancient precedents, prefer to 
stand for a moment bowing themselves down in private prayer 
as they approach the Altar. I submit that the censing of the 
Altar and the priest at this time is essentially of the same 
‘character with these acts. It would be idle to contend that 
it compares with them in point of conspicuousness ; but equally 
with them it is a ceremonial adjunct of a ceremony necessarily 
performed—the ceremony of approach to the Altar. 


il. The veading of the Gospel. It is a peculiar feature of our 
rite that, if the rubric be strictly and literally taken, the priest 
is himself directed to read the Gospel. Universal practice, 
however, as well as Injunctions and Canons, may be taken as 
sufficient proof that the rubric is not to be so read. The 
deacon as gospeller is an established minister. He has his 
“time of ministration,’ and consequently his ornaments to 
use at the time. There is no clearer instance of the inter- 
pretation of the rubrics by the principle of continuity. I 
return to the Sarum Missal, and I find a very brief direction 
for the censing at this point. It is found in the rubric for the 
first Sunday in Advent: ‘Diaconus antequam accedat ad 
Evangelium pronunciandum thurificet medium altaris tantum.” 
He then took up the text of the Gospels, and with his 
attendants proceeded to the pulpitum to read the Gospel. It is 


L 


146 


well known that from very early times the reading of the 
Gospel was done with great solemnity. It was regarded as a 
ceremony of the first importance. The accompanying details 
are not separate ceremonies; they are adjuncts, varying in 
time and place, of the one great unvarying ceremony which 
they adorned. We retain that ceremony. When a priest is 
celebrating the Lord’s Supper without any attendant ministers, 
he performs this ceremony in what we may call a very uncere- 
monious manner. But where there is a deacon or priest in 
attendance he performs it, almost invariably, with some degree, 
however slight, of ceremonial solemnity. He may go to the 
pulpit or lectern, or some other suitable place, that he may be 
the better heard. A fitting part of the solemnity proper to this 
‘time of ministration’’ I submit to be the use of Incense 
after the ancient manner. 


iii. The Offertory—The Priest is directed, after the sermon 
ended, to ‘‘return to the Lord’s Table and begin the Offertory.’” 
I take it that the word Offertory is here used for a whole part 
of the service, or an integral ceremony, which he begins by 
reading one or more of the sentences prescribed. How far 
shall we suppose this ceremony of the ‘‘ Offertory ” to extend ? 
While the sentences are read the alms of the people are 
collected ; they are then brought to the Priest, who presents 
them and places them upon the Holy Table. He then places 
upon the Table the Bread and Wine for the Communion, after 
which done he says the Prayer containing the petition ‘“ to 
accept our alms and oblations.’’ There is then a marked break 
in the service, occupied by an address to the people who are 
about to communicate. This break would seem to be the end 
of the Offertory, which the Priest begins after the sermon. The 
Offertory is therefore a somewhat complicated ceremony. Did 
the same ceremony exist in the unreformed Missal, and is 
this a continuation of that? The Offertorium was the name of 
a verse sung by the clerks; our sentences are the direct 
representatives of this, as is shown by the transitional use of the 
Book of 1549, where they are introduced with the rubric ‘Then 
shall follow for the Offertory one or more of these sentences 
of Holy Scripture.” The Sarum Missal contains a long and 


147 


rather confused rubric directing what is to be done post Offertorium. 
The essence of it consists in this, that the deacon brought to 
the priest the chalice and paten, with the elements already 
prepared, the priest placed them on the Altar, and then said the 
prayer, Suscipe Sancta Trinitas, hanc oblationem, Gc. ; after which 
he censed the oblations. Other prayers and actions follow, with 
which I need not concern myself. What I have to submit is that 
our ceremony of the Offertory is in substance identical with this. 
We have a detail which is not mentioned in the Sarum Missal 
—the collection of the people’s devotions and their presentation 
at the Altar; but there is evidence that the collection was not 
uncommon before the reformation of the services, and therefore 
this is not a wholly new feature. The other details, the 
placing of the bread and wine upon the Altar and the prayer for 
the acceptance of the oblations, remain unchanged. These are 
the invariable, the integral parts of theceremony. The accom- 
panying use of Incense, according to the unreformed rite, was 
an occasional adjunct. It varied from time to time even in the 
same church. It was sometimes more simple, sometimes more 
elaborate. At Salisbury on ordinary days the oblations only 
were censed; but on days when the Creed was sung there 
followed a most complicated censing of all the assistants. This 
may be urged as a ground for a considerable simplification of 
the ancient details; but the censing at the Offertory in 
general I submit to be not a separate or additional cere- 
mony, but an adjunct of the prescribed ceremony, which is 
covered by the Ornaments Rubric ordering the priest at this 
particular ‘“‘time of his ministration ” to use the ancient 
ornaments appropriate thereto. There are other adjuncts used 
at this time by universal agreement. The rubrics are so 
scanty here that they cannot be held to exclude all that is not 
mentioned. No mention is made, for example, of chalice or 
paten, or of the manner in which the bread and wine are to be 
placed on the Altar. We are not told how they are to be 
brought, by whom, or from what place. A credence table is 
held to be a natural, though it cannot be called a necessary, 
adjunct to this ceremony. A silk veil is commonly used for 
covering the sacred vessels. At St. Paul’s Cathedral they are 
ceremonially brought by one of the assistants from the credence 


148 


so veiled. This cannot be called an additional ceremony. It is part 
and parcel of that ceremony which the Book of Common 
Prayer orders without prescribing details. I submit that, 
however much differing in degree, the use of Incense is identical 
in kind with such added details, and has the further justification, 
which they lack, of being covered by the Ornaments Rubric. 


TAU AUACE Ye 


149 


APPENDIX G. 


ON THE EDWARDIAN INVENTORIES. OF 
CHURCH GOODS. 


ae 


Tue principle of confiscation of Church goods for the use 
of the Crown had been introduced by the suppression of the 
Monasteries, and the whole story of the Edwardian Inventories 
of parish goods shows that the purpose of them was not con- 
nected with ecclesiastical reform, but was intended to prevent 
private embezzlement and keep the goods for the use of the 
King. 

At the beginning of the reign of Edward VI. an inventory 
was ordered to be made “of all manner goodes plate juells 
_vestyments bells and other ornaments within every paryshe,”’ 
such goods being directed to ‘‘ be safely kept and appoyncted 
to the charge of such persons as shulde kepe the same safely 
and be ready to aunswere to the same at all times.”! 

Notwithstanding this, much private embezzlement went 
on, and in February, 1549-50, a new set of commissions 
was issued ordering fresh inventories and repeating the pro- 
hibition of sale and alienation.’ 


1 Rot. Pat. 6 Edward VI., p. 7, m. 12 in dorso. Printed in ‘' Seventh 
Report of the Deputy Keeper of the Public Records” (London, 1846). 
Appendix II., p. 307. 

2 «©The Inventories of Church Goods for the Counties of York 
Durham, and Northumberland.’ Surtees Society, Vol. 97. Preface, p. xi. 


150 


About a year later the mask was thrown off, and on 3rd 
March 1550-1, ‘it was decreed that forasmuche as the Kinges 
Majestie had neede presently of a masse of mooney, therfore 
Commissions shulde be addressed into all shires of Englande to 
take into the Kinges handes suche churche plate as remaigneth, 
to be emploied unto his highnes use.” ! This act of robbery and 
sacrilege was not, however, carried into effect at once, and it 
was not until 29th January, 1551-2, that the Privy Council 
directed the issue of letters to the custos votulorum of every shire, 
“to delyver unto the Commissioners named in the same 
lettres such inventories as were before delyvered to theyre 
custody by other the Kinges Majesties Commissioners, of the 
plate, jewells, bells and other thinges belonging to the parishe 
churches within the same shieres.”2 The form of letter thus 
addressed to the Commissioners for Bedfordshire is entered, 
but without date, on the Patent Roll for 6 Edward VI., and 
followed by the names of the commissioners for each county. 

The commission repeats the usual tale of the embezzle- 
ment or removal of ‘‘somme part” of the church goods ‘in 
somme places,” and directs the taking of a new set of inven- 
tories to be compared with those previously made. ‘‘ For the 
defaults and wants yf any shalle eyther of; the said plate 
juelles belles vestyments or any other ornaments or any part 
of theym any manner of wyse” the commissioners were to 
make diligent enquiry and search “‘ to knowe and understond by 
whose default the same hath bene removed embesiled aliened 
or dimynyshed,” and were empowered to imprison any persons 
who wilfully and stubbornly refused to obey their orders. The 
commissioners had no directions to seize the goods.® 

Within a few days of the close of the sixth year of the 
King’s reign the final stage of this sacrilegious robbery of the 
Church goods was reached by the issue of a commission to 
gather in the spoil. It is directed to the Comptroller of the 


1“ Acts of the Privy Council of England.” Edited by Iohn Roche 
Dasent (London. 1890). N, S. iii, (1550-1552), 228 

2 Ibid. N.S, iti, (1550-1552), 467. 

* For the full text of the Commission see “Seventh Report of the 
Deputy Keeper of the Public Records? (London, 1846), Appendix II, 307, 


151 


Household, the Vice-Chamberlain, the Master of the Rolls, 
and five others, and instructs them (1) to receive all the 
inventories lately made, and (2) ‘to collect or cause to be col- 
lected and brought togeyther all and singuler redye money 
plate and Juelles certyfyed by our Commysioners aforesaid to 
remayne in any church Chapell Guild,” etc. ‘‘ causing the said 
ready money to be delyvered by indenture to our use to 
thandes of our trustie servaunt sir Edmond Peckham knyght 
and causing the said plate and Juelles to be delyvered lykewise 
by Indenture to our use to thandes of the maister of our Juell 
house for the tyme being.’’ ZThecommission continues: ‘And 
to thintent the said Churches and Chapelles may be 
furnysshedd of convenyent and comely things mete for 
thadmynystracion of the holy Communyon in the same Wee 
Biverunto youl... so. full power and auctorytye to leave or 
cause to be leaft out of the said plate for the same purpose and 
to the same use in everye Chathedrall or Collegiat Churche 
where Chalyces be remaynyng one or two chalyces by your 
discrecions [defaced]. And in every great paryshe where 
Chalyces be remaynyng one or two chalycs by your discreacion 
and in every small paryshe or chapell where Chalycs be 
Fempynyng one chalice .:... .2. And we gyve unto 
OURMS. a's; 6 full power and auctory after the honest and 
comely furnyture of coverynges for the communyon table 
and surples or surplesses for the mynyster or mynysters 
in the said churches or chapells by your discrecions to 
dystribute or cause to be distrybuted and geven freely to 
the poore people in every parysh wheare the same 
churches and chapells stond and be The resydue of the 
lynnyn ornaments and ymplements of the said churches 
and chapells in suche order and sort as may be most to 
Godes glory and our honor. And we gyve unto.... you 
full powe[r} and auctory to sell or cause to be sold to our 
use all and singuler copes, vestments, Aulter clothes and other 
other ornaments whatsoever remaynyng or being within any of 
the said churches or chapells not appoyncted by this our Com- 
myssion to be leafte in the said churches or chapells or to be 
dystrybuted to the poore as afore ys declared. And also to 
sell or cause to be sold to our use by weight all parcells or peces 


152 


of metall except the metall of great bell saunse bell in every of 
the said churches or chapells. The money commyng of which 
sales so.to be made informe before declayred and all other 
sommes of money whiche shall come and be brought into our 
use by vertue of this Commyssion We will ye shall delyver 
or cause to be delyvered by Indenture to thandes of the said 
syr Edmond Peckham to our use.””’ The commissioners were 
further instructed to direct letters to proper persons in each 
county authorizing them ‘‘ to make colleccion to our use of the 
said ready money plate and Juells and make sale to our use of 
the said coopes vestments and ornaments of sylke without gold 
sattyn of bridges dornix worsted Saye and of other thyngs 
appoyncted to be sold as ys before declared and to leave in 
every churche and Chapell such Chalyce or Chalyces and such 
lynnyn fornyture for the same Churches and Chapelles as ys 
before appoynted and to dystrybute the resydue of the said 
lynnyn ornaments and ymplements to the poore of everye 
paryshe in sort before declared, etc.’”’! The date of this docu- 
ment, with its canting reference to ‘‘ Godes glory and our honor ” 
and its pretended solicitude for the poor, is 16th January, 


1552-3, or within seven months of the death of King 
Edward. 


iB. 


Of the inventories of the Church goods taken in 1552, in 
view of their contemplated confiscation by the Crown for the 
replenishment of the exchequer, complete returns exist in the 
Public Record Office for nearly all the counties. Some of 


these have been published in full, while others are only partly 
in print. 


1For the full text from the Patent Roll of 6 Edward VI. (pt..7 m. 11 
in dorso) see ‘‘ Seventh Report of the Deputy Keeper of the Public Records” 
(London, 1846), Appendix II,, pp. 312314 


153° 


An analysis of the returns of twelve counties, trom easily 
accessible sources, yields the following results :— 


County. Number of Censers Percentage. 
Churches. noted in, 
Hertfordshire? -136 28 20°6 
Berkshire? 63 28 44 
Worcestershire LED 52 34°4 
Leicestershire® 61 5 8:2 
Warwickshire® 184 69 375 
Lancashire? 44 19 4x2 
Essex$ 125 Ap 18°4 
Cumberland? ea 17 15:3 
Derbyshire! 82 20 24°3 
Yorks. East Riding! 193 48 24°8 
Kent!” 135 41 30°4 
Surrey! DEG, 28 23°09 
1,402 378 27 


Censers are noted as having been sold in 2 parishes in 
Watwickshire, 15 is Essex, 2 in Derbyshire, 9 in Kent, and 
13 in Surrey, or 41 inall. Thefts of censers are recorded in 
15 parishes. 


2 J. E. Cussans, ‘Inventory of Furniture and Ornaments remaining 
in all the Parish Churches of Hertfordshire in the last Year of the Reign 
of King Edward the Sixth.’”’ Oxford and London: James Parker and Co. 
1873. 

3 Walter Money, ‘‘ Parish Church Goods in Berkshire, a.D 1552.”’ 
Oxford and London: James Parker and Co. 1879. 

4 “ Associated Societies’ Reports,” xi. 310. 

5 Tbid, xii, 133. 

6 « Warwickshire Antiquarian Magazine,” 154. 

7 «Inventories of Goods in the Churches and Chapels of Lancashire 
taken in the Year a.p. 1552.” Chetham Society, vols, cvii. and cxiii. 

8 « Transactions of the Essex Archeological Society,” iv. 215; N.S. 1. 
Gi, 167; 11.38; 

9 «Transactions of the Cumberland and Westmorland Antiquarian 
and Archzological Society,” viii. 186. 

1 «The Reliquary,” xi. 

1 [bid, xii. 196; xiii 49. 

12 « Archeologia Cantiana,” viii. 74; ix 266; x. 282; xi. 409 
xiv. 290. 

13 « Surrey Archeological Collections,” iv. 1-193. 


154 


At St. Swithun’s, Worcester, the parish had sold a copper 
censer and ship, but retained a silver censer. 

At Rayleigh, Essex, a silver ship and censer had been sold 
in the second year of King Edward’s reign, but a censer and 
ship of copper had been retained. 

At Chelsham, Surrey, a pair of censers had been sold and 
a pair retained. 

In Kent, although there were extensive sales of Church 
goods, only in nine parishes out of 135 were the censers sold. 

But few inventories of the goods and ornaments of the 
cathedral churches have been preserved for the reign of 
Edward VI. Such, however, as exist show that censers had 
been retained in them as in the parish churches. The following 
are instances: 


21552, York. 


‘A pair of censors of gold, 170z. A shell of silver for the 
Same. Censors, 1.0Z<. 6. - A pair of great censors of silver 
and guilt 100 oz. A pair ot great censors, of silver 64 oz. [and 
four other ‘pair ’’]. 


York Fabric Rolls, Surtees Society, vol. 35, p. 307. 
1552, Exeter. 
‘ij silver censors. A silver shippe with a spone.” 
The Ecclestologist, xxix. 42, 43. 
1552, Winchester. 


‘ij silvar censors... .j shippe of silvar with a litle 
silvar spone.” 


Archaologia, vol. xliii., p. 235. 
1552, Carlisle. 
‘one pare of sencers.” 
Tvansactions of the Cumberland and Westmorland 
Antiquarian and Archeological Society, viii. 194. 
1552, ot. Paul’s, London. 


‘ij faire Sensours of silver and gilte w" high covers w® vj 
wyndowes and batilments in the myddes of them wythe iiij 
chaynes of silver apeece. . . ... cx unc. . 


155 


on sensoure of silver and parcell gilte w* iij libardes heddes 
on the cover w* vj wyndowes and pinacles and iiij chaynes 
of silver thereunto appertaynynge. .... OV" UING, 

On little Sensour of Silver and gilte the cover is the forme 
of an olde churche w® wyndowes and pinacles w" v shorte 
chaynes of Syllver wyer..... Xlj unc. iij qu. 

a greate large Sensoure all silver w* manye wyndowes 
and battilments usedd to sense w® all in the _ penticoste 
weeke in bodie of the chirche of pawles at the procession 
EY 0 2nic-% clvilj unc. iij qu. 

on shyppe of silver all whight w‘ a spone in it to take owte 
frankensence w‘ all... . xviij unc. di. 


The Ecclestologist, xvii., 198, 199. 
And as late as 1563 the cathedral church of Canterbury 
retained 


‘<7 paire of Sensors of Latten and one shippe of latten and 
another of copper.” 


(MS. Inv. penes Dec. et Cap. Cantuar.) 


Viet rote OLN HOPE: 


157 


APPENDIX H. 


THE "POSTREFORMATION USES OF INCENSE, 


I. The following inventory shows a view of the ornaments 
which, though rare, was at any rate a loyal view of the pro- 
visions of the Act of Uniformity and of the Prayer Book :— 


Thys Indentuer made at bodmynn the Sunday next after 
the ffeast of Seynt mygell the archangell ynn the eyght yere of 
the Raygne of our Soueraygne Lady Elyzabeth by the grace of 
god of Englond ffrancie and Irelond quene defender of the 
ffaythe &c. Betwyne Nycolas Cory mayor of the towne of 
bodmyn of thone party and Rychard Water and Thomas Cole 
tanner Wardens of the Churche of St. Petherick ynn bodmyn 
aforesayd of thother party Wyttenesseth that the sayd Rychard 
Water and Thomas Cole Wardens and ther successors 
Wardens hath taken and receyved into ther handes and 
kepyng of the sayd Nicholas Cory mayor and of all the hole 
paryshe aforesayd to be used and occupyed to the honer of god 
ynn the same churche from the day and yere aforesayd fourth- 
ward all such goodes and ornamentes as folowth and hath taken 
uppon them for them and ther successors to yeld a true 
reckenyng of all the same goodes and ornamentes and delyvery 
therof to make withut deley to the sayd Nycholas Cory and 
his successors for the tyme beyng mayor and to all the hole 
paryshe of bodmynn aforesayd this tyme xij monethes that ys 
to wete. 

fyrst fyve belles with one wich servyth for y* clock to be 

rung dayly at ffower of the clock ynn the mornyng 
& at eyght ynn the evenyng a warning bell for 
printsyes and others 


Item, one vestment of grene satyn of bryddes. 


158 


Item, one hole sute of blew velut.decon subdecon & 


Item, 


Item, 


Item, 
Item, 


litem .. 


pistholere 
a pere of vestmentes of whyte damaske 
one cope of red satyn of bryddes 
a vestment of blew velut 
one whyte cope of satyn. 
one whyte vestment of satyn 
and more toe copes used on good fryday & a obe of 


sylck. 
one crosse banner of grene sylck 
one frunt of yelo..... grene satyn of bryddes 


toe cortens wherof one of sylck 

a nother frunt of Arres, a nother frunt of sey &a 

curtens of the same 

. cusshyn of velut for the commuyon tabell and 

a cusshyng of sylcke for M* Mayor ys chere and 

a cloth of cheker work for M* Mayor ys chere 

a shype of tyn 

viij pere of surpeles with one new for M* Vycar 

ilij* rachetes 

a bybeil & .... of Erasmus 

ij pere of candelstyckes, a bason of laten, a lampe 
before the hye auter 

one corperal of red velut & a nother of green . . 

a corpus cloth one dex cloth toe stoles for sett at the 
comunion tabell 

a herse cloth of velut and a nother of black bocorom 
sencer of latten 

toe lent clothes for y° commyon tabell 

ij polys one of brasse & a nother of yron 

ij new vant clothes [and a nold cancelled] 

a sacryng bell a cruat 

iij Jesus cotes 1j red wosterd & one of red bocrom 

iij tormenttowers cotes of satyn of bryddes of yolo. 
and blues. <5 co 

ij cappes of sylck 

i) develes cotes wherof one ys newe [toe sandyers 
cotes of whyte cancelled] 


159 


a croune of black 

AynOuner tory yon. 2... .« sell ofaicross ~~... ,-and 
a nold crosse 

one comouyn cup of sylver and one other gylt 

w® hery Cock used at weddynges. ...andry & 
toe clottes of led 


In [witnes]s herof the partes to thes present Indentuer 
interchayngabelly have putte [their] seles ye day & yere above 
w [ritten] 

Endorsed. Betwene N Cory Mayor Ric. Wat’ & T Cole 
tanner Wardens. Invent’ ornament’ eccl’ie. 


J. Maclean, History of the Deanery of Trigg Minor i. 341. 
(London, 1868). cp. Jouvn. Royal Inst. of Cornwall vii. 121, 


II. In certain rules ‘‘for the Clarkes” ordered by the 
Vestry of St. Michael, Cornhill, London, on Aug. 24th, 1589, 
to be written in their parchment book ‘for perpetual 
memory ” :— 


‘Also they shall provyde ffor ffyre at all such ffeastes as 
Incense is accustomed to be offered unto Allmightie God with 
other thinges necessary to the office according to the solempnitie 
of the ffeaste.”’ 


These and other rules were drawn up temp. Henry VII. and 
Henry VIII., but were gone over by a Committee of the 
parish in 1589 and ordered to be kept as being “‘ good and 
availeable.’”’ See Overend Churchwardens’ Accounts. 


III. ExizaABETHAN AND LATER INSTANCES OF INCENSE COL- 
LECTED BY W. H. S‘.Joun Hope FRoM CHURCH- 
WARDENS’ ACCOUNTS. 

¢. 1550 York Munster. 

For frankynsense, 7s. 
1558-9 Reading, St. Mary. 
Payed for ffranconsense, ijd. 


1560 Reading, St. Mary. 
Payd for halfe a pound of francunsense, vjd 


160 


1567-8 York Munster. 
For frankynsense, 2d. 
1589 London, St. Michael, Cornhill. 
Paide for ffrankensence to aire the Vault, ijd. 
1592 Westminster, St. Margaret. 
Pd. for perfumes of frankincense, junyper, and pack- 
threde, Is. 
1619 Bishop Stortford, St. Michael. . 
Pd. for Junyper to burne in the churche this year, ls. 
1625 Pd. for pitch and ffrancunsense to burn in the 
church, vs. 
1627 Pd... . for Juniper and thinges to perfume the 
church. 
Reading, St. Laurence. 
1644 For ffrankincense to sweeten the church, Is. 
1645 To Daniel Browne for making cleane the church twice 
and for pitch and frankincense, 5s. 
1646 Pd. for 1! of frankincense and of pitch to perfume the 
church, 8d. 
Pd. for 2" of pitch and 2" of frankincense used in the 
church, ts. 4d. 
1644 Loughborough. 
Payd . . . for dressinge the church after the Souldiers 
and for frankincense to sweeten it, 2s. 4d. 
1741 Barnstaple, St. Peter. 


Paid for Tobacco and Frankincense burnt in the 
Church, 2s. 6d. 


1752 Paid for Frankincense, Senemon, and Charcole, 3s. 


IV. AppiTIonaL INSTANCES FROM OTHER SOURCES. 


(i.) Churchwardens’ Accounts, St. Mary, Cambridge. 
1562 For Frankynscense to perfume the chirche, 1d. 
For do. 2d. 
1573 Item for Perfumes and Frankincense for 
the Church 8d. 


161 


Similar entries to these two last frequently occur at this 
time, and are very important as bearing witness to the fact 
. . . that the use of Incense for warming and perfuming our 
Churches was continued for many years subsequent to the 
Reformation (E. Venables. On the Church of St. Mary. 
Camb. Camden Soc. Trans., p. 271). 
He adds in a footnote : 


Althallows, Steyning. 
1563 In the time of y® sickness. Item for 
gennepore (juniper) ffor the 
cherche id. 
1625 The time of God’s visitation. Item 
paid for x* of ffrankinsence at 


3° p’ pound 00,02°,06. 
1665 Paid two several times for Beniamin 
(Benzoin) to burn in the Church 02°,06. 


Jesus College Chapel. 
1588 Juniper to air the Chapel on St. 
Mark’s Day. 


(i1.) Solthull, Warwickshire. 
1665 paid to George Bird for mending the 


altar stone 1s. 6d. 
payd for bread and wine and frankin- 
cense for the first Sacrament 13S. 2d. 


Warw. Antiq. Mag., 34. 


(iii.) The Churchwardens’ Account Book for the Parish of 
St. Peter’s Mancroft, in the City of Norwich, contains the 
following entries :— 


1629. Item p? for frankensenc and Rosen [and other 
thing] xxj¢. 
1621. P4 for hollver and Ivey, Frannckensenc and pack- 
thred agaynst Christmas xx‘. 
1666. Pi Jonathan Parker for burch 000.02.00. 
P4 him more for perfume to burne in the 
Church 000.01.06. 
Norfolk Antiquarian Miscellany, Vol. I1., part ii. 
Edited by Walter Rye, 1883. 


162 


(iv.) From the Churchwardens’ Account Book of St. 
Margaret’s, in the City of Norwich. 


158r.Item for perfume when Mrs. Jerningham was 
beryed, 2¢ 
1589. Item paid for ffrankynge sense, 3°. 


Eastern Counties Collectanea. 
Edited by John L’Estrange (Norwich, 1872-3). 


(v.) In 1574, at St. Margaret’s, Fenchurch Street. 


Item, Paid for hollye and ivye and ffrankinsense against 
Chrysmas Day. 

Item, Payd for a parfuming pan. 

Item, Payd for strauing yearbes agaynst my Lord of London 
preached the XX™* of November, ilj*. 

Item, Payd for parfuming of the church that day, vj°. 


V. Incense was recommended by George Herbert. 


“The country parson... . takes order .. . that=une 
Church be swept and kept clean without dust or cobwebs ; and 
at great festivals strewed and stuck with boughs and perfumed 
with Incense.” 


George Herbert—The Country Parson, ch. xiii. 


This extract explains the foregoing entries in the church- 
wardens’ accounts. 


For others see Hzevurgia Anglicana, pp. 180, 181, 346, and 
the passage describing the burning of Incense by R. Sherlock 
the day before Communion where the cleansing of a chancel 
had raised an insufferable stench, /b. 183. 


VI. Incense was used by Bishop Andrewes in his chapel. 


In the chapel of Bishop Andrewes there stood on a table 
outside the sanctuary in front of the altar ‘a triquertrall censor 
wherein y® Clarke putteth frankincense at y® reading of the 
first lesson,” with ‘‘ the Navicula like y® keele of a boat wta 
halfe cover and a foote, out of which the frankincense is 
‘poured.”’ 


168 


Prynne complained of this in the trial of Archbishop Laud, 
mentioning :-—‘« A censor to burn Incense in at the reading of 
the First Lesson as in the Popish Masse and Churches. A 
little Boate out of which the Frankincense is poured, &c. 
which Doctor Cosens had made use of in Peter house where 
he burned Incense.” . 

The inventory of the furniture, together with a plan, was 
tound by Prynne among Laud’s papers, and was quoted to in- 
criminate him. It included “a triquetrall Censor” and “a 
Laton pan for it.” Laud admitted that he had copied Andrewes. 


W. Prynne. Canterbury's Doom, pp. 122-124 (London, 1646). 


This points to a use of Incense either at the Gospel or else 
at the Magnificat or Te Deum. 


VII. Incense was used by Bishop Cosin. 


“In Peterhouse Chappel there was a glorious new Altar 
set up and mounted on steps to which the Master Fellowes 
Schollers bowed and were enjoyned to bow by Dr. Cosens, the 
Master who set it up” with ‘ Basons Candlestickes Tapers 
standing on it and a great Crucifix hanging over it.” 


“In S. John’s and Peter House Chappells there were 
Pictures of the Holy Ghost in forme of a Dove; that in Peter 
House there was likewise a carved Crosse at the end of every 
seat, and on the Altar a Pot which they usually called the 
incense pot.” 

W. Prynne, Canterburies Doom, pp. 73, 74- 

This was probably the Incense ship like those which stood 
on the Altar in Queen Elizabeth’s Chapel in 1565 and 
Charles I.’s in 1646. 

Hierurgia Anglicana, pp. 4-6, 194. 
VIII. THe Manner or ALTERING THE COMMUNION TABLE 
OF THE COLLEGIATE CHURCH OF WOLVERHAMPTON, 
Cis) OCC. 

On Sunday, Oct. 11, 1635, a new Altar was dedicated at 
Wolverhampton. 

“ Assoone as the Preists (for so they would be called to 
suite the better with their Altar) came to the Church, each of 


164 


them* made a Low Congie [bow] a peece at their very first 
entring in at the great Church dore and an other Congie a 
peece at the Ile dore, and after that 3 Congies a peece towards 
the Altar (before its dedication): and so they went in to the 
Chancell where a bason of water and a towel was provided for 
the Preists to wash in, where was incense burnind which 
perfumed the whole Church.” 


‘«‘ After sermon they went to the Dedication or rather as the 
Preacher stiled it, Renovation of the Altay : and in the Bell-house 
4 of them putt on the rich broydered Copes, and every one of 
them had a Paper in his hand which they termed a Censey, and 


so they went up to the Altay, reading as it wentt, for they 
looked often on it.” 


A Quenchcoal . . .. (London, 1637). pp. 197, 198 quoted 
at length in Huevurgia Angl., 394-397. See also pp- 
181, 357- But note that the summary of the above 
quoted on p. 357 is from ‘* Ladensium abroxard«piots,”” 
p. 87, H. Burton, For God and the King, p. 161 
(London, 1636) also gives a summary of the above. 


IX. Incense is alleged as part of the indictment of the 
Church’s ceremonial in A Parallel or Brief Comparison of the 
Liturgy with the Mass-book, R. B. K., 1641. 

The following description is given of the reading of the 
Gospel :— 


‘*« When the Deacon hath lifted the text of the Gospel from 
the Altar, hee gives it to the Subdeacon to carry at his back: 
two waxe candles are lifted from the Altar by two Acolytes to 
bee carried burning before him so long as the Gospel is in 
reading ; the cross or crucifix is also on Festival days carried 
before the Gospel and also a Censer with fire and Incense: the 
book is crossed and perfumed, and, when the lesson is ended, 
the Booke by the Deacon is kissed .... the wax candles 
are standing on the Altars already: the silver Crucifix ig 
avowed by Pocklington to have a meet standing upon the same 
Altar ; the crossings and perfumings! and lights are maintained 


' cp. p. 84. ‘'. . . perfumings. These we have already.” 


165 


by Andvewes as Canterbury sets him forth: the kissing of the 
Booke is now daily practised.” 


These puritan complaints must not be relied on: they were 
probably nomoretrustworthy than their modern representatives. 


X. It was said of the great Chillingworth by a scurrilous 
adversary at his death, in a book published in 1644 :— 


‘‘ Being Cancellarius it was conceived that he should be 
buried itva cancellos and rot under the Altar near the pot of 
Incense, that the constant perfume of the Incense might excuse 
the thrift of his executrix.” 


Francis Cheynell, Chillingwortht Novissima, p. 31. 
Quoted in P. Des Maizeaux, Account of the Life 
and Writings of William Chillingworth, p. 355 
(London, 1725). 


XI. Robert Herrick published, in 1648, the following lines 


’ 


in “ Julia’s Churching or Purification ” :— 


‘*Put on thy holy filletings. 

Burn first thine Incense, next when as thou seest 
The candid stole thrown o’er the pious priest 
With reverent curtsies come, and to him bring 
Thy free and not decurted offering.” 


The Incense here takes its place with the woman’s veil and 
the priest’s surplice. Herrick, himself a priest, was drawing ’a 
picture from life. Other allusions to Incense, especially in 
connexion with Christmas and Epiphany, occur not only else- 
where in Herrick, but also in Crashaw’s and Beaumont’s 
poems. 


XII. Incense was used in 1612 in Trinity College, Dublin, 
at the funeral of Dr. Luke Challoner, the father-in-law of 
Archbishop Ussher. See Carr’s Life and Times of James Usher, 
p. 102 (London n.d.). And again there, in 1669, at the funeral 
of John Stearne, Ussher’s nephew and Founder and first 
President of the College of Physicians. See Belcher’s Memoty 
of J. Steayne (Dublin, 1865). These instances point to a tradi- 
tion covering a very crucial era of more than half a century. 


166 


XIII. Archbishop Sancroft’s Form of Consecration of New 
Communion Plate is printed at the end of The Form of Dedica- 
tion and Consecration of a Church ov Chapel, published by 
R. Tisdale in 1703: it was used by him at the Church of 
Coleshill in 1685. It includes the following direction as part 
of the Consecration of the Ornaments: After the paten, 
chalices, flagons, alms bason have been provided for there is an 
appendix which deals with candlesticks and then with a censer, 
thus :— 

{ So likewise when a Censer is presented and received, they say : 


While the King sitteth at his Table, my spikenard sendeth forth the 
smell thereof (Cant. i. 12). 

Let my prayer be set forth before Thee as the incense; and let the 
lifting up of my hands be as the Evening Sacrifice (Psalm cxli. 2). 


It seems doubtful how far the Appendix is of the same 
authority as the rest. 


XIV. It was burnt also at the Bishop’s coming to St. 
Nicholas, Durham, in 1683. See Surtees’ History of Durham, 
iv. 52; cited in Azer. Angl., 183. 


XV. Evelyn notes that on Easter Day, 1684, ‘‘ there was 
perfume burnt before the office began,’ when the King 
communicated at Whitehall Chapel, Jb. 184. 


XVI. Incense was in use in Ely Cathedral down to the 
latter part of the last century. The principal evidence for this 
is the following note of Cole the Antiquary :— 


Incense in Churches. 


I have often heard Mr. Soame Jenyns, who lived at Ely 
when he was young, say, as also Messrs. Bentham and others 
say, that it was the constant Practice on the greater Festivals 
at Ely to burn incense at the Altar in the Cathedral till Dr. 
Thos. Green ‘one of the Prebendaries and now Dean of 
Salisbury (1779) a finical man, tho’ a very worthy one, and 
who is always taking snuff up his Nose, objected to it under 
Pretence that it made his Head to ach. Mr. Dodwell has 
wrote an ingenious Tract on the Subject and against its 


primitive institution. 
Brit. Mus. Add. MS. 5873. f. 82>. 


167 


The note is inserted under letter I. in Cole’s Alphabetical 
Collections for an Athene Cantabrigienses. 

There seems to be no reason for doubting the accuracy of this 
statement: on the other hand there is another tradition less 
well authenticated and less probable, which must also be taken 
into account. It is best found in a letter printed in The 
Guardian of Jan. 6, 1875. 


Sir,—The interesting obituary notice of the late Rev. 
George Gilbert contained in the last number of the Guardian 
reminds me of a letter which I received from that amiable and 
good man some years ago, and which is, I think, worthy of 
preservation by admission into your columns. Mr. Gilbert 
had more than once spoken to me on the subject of the use of 
Incense in Ely Cathedral, and I requested him to put in writing 
exactly what he knew on the subject. The result was the 
following letter : 

Grantham, 37d April, 1869. 

My dear Mr. Dean,—In regard to the use of Incense 
in your Cathedral Church, of which we spoke yesterday, I have 
to observe: That in the month of July, 1840, the Rev. John 
Metcalfe, Minor Canon of Canterbury, informed me that the 
use of Incense had been continued at Ely to a late period; that 
his father, the Rev. W. Metcalfe, Minor Canon of Ely, heing 
troubled with asthmatic tendencies, found great embarrassment 
in breathing when, discharging the function of Deacon in Ely 
Cathedral, he had to swing and wave the vessel containing the 
said Incense, and earnestly requested the Dean and Chapter to 
discontinue its use; and that the Dean and Chapter did order 
the discontinuance thereof, to his great comfort. This took 
place, I believe, at the latter end of the eighteenth century. But 
as the date of Mr. Metcalfe’s appointment to the minor canonry 
at Ely could be easily ascertained, the period to which its use 
lasted could be at least by approximation fixed. I end this 
formally by writing that J afivm the above statement to be true ; 
and I beg you, my dear Mr. Dean, to regard me as yours 
respectfully and truly, 

GerorGE GILBERT, Prebendary of Lincoln 
and Vicar of Syston-by-Grantham. 


To the Very Reverend the Dean of Ely. 


168 


I have only to add that on receiving Mr. Gilbert’s letter I 
caused an examination to be made in order to ascertain whether 
the books of the Dean and Chapter contained any entry with 
reference to the discontinuance of the use of Incense; but 
nothing was found bearing upon the point. 


Harvey CARLISLE. 
Rose Castle, January 1st, 1875. 


In the next issue the matter was taken up thus, under date 
January 13th :— 


Srtr,—I can confirm the statement of the late Rev. G. 
Gilbert, quoted by the Bishop of Carlisle in your last number, 
relative to the use of Incense in Ely Cathedral up to com- 
paratively a recent date. Ina MS. journal! which I have been 
lately reading, the writer records on July 9th, 1732, that ‘‘at y® 
3 great Festivals They cense y® Cathedral of Ely, burning 
Frankincense and sweett woods in all parts of it.’ His in- 
formant was the Bishop of St. Asaph (Tanner), whose guest he 
was at the time. &c., &c., &c. 


Witiiam Woop. 
January 9th, 1875. 


There seems to be some confusion between these two 
accounts. According to the earlier one the cessation of Incense 
must be dated before 1779, and according to the later after 
1778, when Mr. Metcalfe became Minor Canon?: these seem 
to be incompatible. Again, the Dean’s headache is a different 
cause from the Minor Canon’s asthma. It is no doubt possible 
that each of the ailments led to a protest, but the difficulty of 
date remains. 

What certainly lies behind both is the fact that Incense was 
burnt in the Cathedral not only up to 1732, as Bishop Tanner 
recounted, but later also. 


** Archdeacon Chapman has found certain parcels of bills 
and two waste books in our Muniment Room, and from these 


1 The journal was that of John Loveday, Esq., of Caversham. 
2 Stevenson's Supplement to Bentham’s Ely 


169 


it appears that the purchase of 4b. of Frankincense took place 
fairly regularly twice a year, in March and December, from 
1708-1747. In 1712 so much as 44lbs. was bought in March. 
From 1799 the bills are preserved in good order, and no 
further entries of frankincense appear.” 


Letter of the Dean of Ely to Lord Halifax, April 1st, 1899. 


The Chapter Order book of the period gives no clue either 
to the use or disuse of the Incense. Under the circumstances 
the statement that Incense was swung ceremonially by the 
Deacon at the Altar awaits further confirmation.! 


XVII. At the Coronation of George III. William Smith, 
the King’s Groom of the Vestry, walked in the Procession to 
the Coronation “in a scarlet dress holding a perfuming pan, 
burning perfumes.” 


Rich. Thomson, Coronation of George III., p. 41 (1820). 


He figures in the engraving prefixed to the book, where his 
long scarlet dress and perfuming pan may be seen. 

Similarly in 1685 at the Coronation of James II. there was 
‘George Oldnar Grome of the Vestry in a scarlet Robe 
with a perfuming pan in his hand burning perfumes all the 
way from Westminster Hall to the Quire-door in the Church.” 


F. Sandford, History of the Coronation of James II., 
p. 70 (1687). 

The engraving of the Procession is here much larger and 
better. The two Yeomen of the Vestry, after arriving in quire, 
were occupied with moving the Litany Desk, &c., and ‘‘ were 
ordered to attend near the Altar to observe the commands of 
the Archbishop.” 

The interval of time between these two Coronations must be 
bridged by An account of the Ceremomies observed im the Coronations 
of the Kings and Queens of England, wiz., James II., William 


1 Briefer versions of each story will be found in the Church Times of 
July 15th and 22nd, 1865; at the later date the Metcalfe-Greenwood story 
is given from a slightly different source. The statements of Mackenzie 
Walcott and others seem only to go back to the same origin. 


170 


and Mary, Anne, George I., Geovge II., published in 1761 
in view of George III.’s coronation. 

There is no mention in the brief accounts of the ceremonies 
of William & Mary and of Queen Anne: but an engraving of 
the procession of the former is included, which shows the 
Groom of the Vestry as before. In the Order for 1714 the 
direction of 1685 is repeated, andin 1727 there is no mention of 
the Groom. 

His function evidently was not liturgical, but was analogous 
to that of the clergy who preceded the Pope on his way to 
Church in the eighth century, or to that of ‘‘ The King’s Herb 
woman (Honor Battiscombe)”’ who, in 1727 and 1761, headed 
the procession ‘‘ followed by her six Maids strewing the way 
with sweet herbs, a basket being carried by every two Maids.” 


XVIII. In 1857. Incense was used about this date at 
St. Mary Magdalene’s, Munster Square, during the 
incumbency of the Rev. E. Stuart, seven or eight years after 
the foundation-stone of the Church was laid. The Eucharistic 
vestments were not begun till Easter, 1864. The Incense was 
at first only used in processions on festivals. 

See the obituary noticein ‘‘ Church Times ”’ of Feb. 23, 1877. 


XIX. There is no need to cite instances in detail of the 
use of Incense between 1857 and the present day: its use in 
recent times is a matter of common knowledge. The number 
of Churches in which it is used in English Dioceses amounted 
in 1898 to nearly three hundred, of which over sixty were London 
Churches. This computation takes no account of Churches in 
India and the Colonies, nor of Anglican Churches in foreign 
countries, nor of the Scottish and American Churches. 


W) THelPRERE, 


171 


PeeeNDIxX I. 


INCENSE UNDER THE PRAYER~BOOK OF 1549. 


THERE exist certain Articles, drawn up shortly after the Prayer 
Book came into use, apparently for the instruction of royal 
and other visitors. Ridley’s Imjunctions given at his Visitation 
in 1550 were founded on these. 

The second Article is as follows (Cardwell, Doc. Aun. 


page 75) :— 


‘*2. Item. For an uniformity, that no minister do counterfeit the 
popish Mass, as to kiss the Lord’s table; washing his fingers 
at every time in the Communion; blessing his eyes with the 
paten, or sudary; or crossing his head with the paten ; shift- 
ing of the book from one place to another ; laying down and 
licking the chalice of the Communion; holding up his 
fingers, hands, or thumbs, joined towards his temples; 
breathing upon the bread or chalice; shewing the sacrament 
openly before the distribution of the Communion ; ringing of 
sacrying bells; or setting any light upon the Lord’s board 
at any time; and finally to use no other ceremonies than are 
appointed in the King’s book of Common Prayers, or kneel- 
ing, otherwise than is in the said book.” 


Here we see a number of cevemonial acts, which had been 
customably done in the unreformed order of the Mass, ex- 
pressly forbidden, and censing is not among them. It is incon- 
ceivable that so conspicuous an act should have been left 
unmentioned if it were regarded as forbidden, or if there were 
any fixed intention of eradicating it. In the concluding sen- 
tence the word cerzionies appears to be used in its stricter 
sense of a distinct action. The ‘‘ other ceremonies”’ which are 


172 


forbidden would be processions, the blessing of the palms, and 
so forth. Compare the addition in Ridley’s Injunctions quoted 
below. 

The gth Article is as follows :— 


‘‘o, Item. That no man maintain purgatory, invocation of saints, 
the sin articles, beadrolls, images, relics, lights, holy bells, 
holy beads, holy water, palms, ashes, candles, sepulchres, 
paschal, creeping to the cross, hallowing of the font of the 
popish manner, oil, chrism, altars, beads, or any other such 
abuses and superstitions, contrary to the King’s Majesty’s 
proceedings.” 


In this strange jumble of things, the maintenace of which 
was forbidden, Incense would certainly have been included if 
there had been any intention of putting it out of use. 

In 1550 Ridley held a Visitation of his diocese. Among 
his Articles to be enquired of is the following (Cardwell, Doc. Ann., 


p> 92) -— 


‘‘ Whether any useth to hallow water, bread, salt, bells, or candles 
upon Candlemas-day, ashes on Ash Wednesday, palms on 
Palm-Sunday, the font on Easter-even, fire on paschal, or 
whether there was any sepulchre on good-friday ?”’ 


These would be ‘‘ other ceremonies than are appointed in the 
King’s Book of Common Prayers.’’ Observe the absence of 
any question about the use of Jucense. It was more likely to 
be retained than many of the above things; yet it is not 
‘enquired of” as a thing unlawful. 

At the same Visitation Ridley issued Injunctions based on 
the Articles quoted above. The second is almost identical 
with the second Article, with the addition of “ Saying the Agnus 
before the Communion” to the acts there forbidden. The final 
clause, however, has an important variation. It runs thus 
(Cardwell, Doc. Ann., p. 93) :— 


‘ And finally, that the minister, in time of the holy communion, do 
use only the ceremonies and gestures appointed by the Book 
of Common Prayer, and none other, so that there do not 
appear in them any Counterfeiting of the popish mass.”’ 


Here Ridley restrains the minister, not merely to the 
cevemomes, but also to the gestwres, ordered in the Prayer Book, 


173 


“and none other.” Strictly interpreted this would exclude 
the use of Incense. It is not impossible that Ridley, while 
shrinking from the express condemnation of Incense, intended 
in this way, by a side wind, to get rid of it. But it is 
important to notice that his prohibition of gestures is directly 
contrary to a provision of the Prayer Book itself, contained in 


the ‘Certain Notes” which were added to the Chapter Of 
Ceremonies, as follows :— 


“As touching kneeling, crossing, holding up of hands, knocking 
upon the breast, and other gestures, they may be used or 
left, as every man’s devotion serveth, without blame.” 


Conclusion.—That the Reformers, even the more extreme, 
under the Prayer Book of 1549, carefully avoided any express 


prohibition of Incense, even if they secretly desired to put it out 
of use. 


i Ap ACY, 


PRINTED BY THE CHURCH PRINTING CO., BURLEIGH STREET, STRAND, 


re ‘ Tt STA he 
SPAN Ute cet ht ets): 


APTN SEALY 


AT Ede Wath) 


DATE DUE 


PRINTEDINU.S.A 


GAYLORD 


ii 


[ne eee — ar a es ARES 
yo fra P =~? es “TR ee oF Fil dae +Sud SORE or ear 
; v7 ‘ it = 2 ry i 


¢ 
‘ 3 
SCTE | 7 
= x - 
Stay. fb 
S 
i] i ‘ 
~~ fg — ‘“ 
x 
é as 
~ 
co rr - 
* d + i at 
S 
— a 


ne naiaadeiima tee 


GE 


i i 