David W T Brattston
The ante-Nicene Christian documents that have come down to us indicate that
ancient Christians did not use incense in their worship at so early a period. On
the contrary, it was expressly prohibited. Some church fathers merely state this
in passing as a simple item of information while the same or other authors
expressly condemn censing. References to it are unaccountably absent where
one would most expect to find them if it had a place in Christian worship in
the first three centuries. Early exegetes uniformly allegorised Scripture
references to incense as having a spiritual rather than literal meaning. There is
one exception to this exclusion of incense from ancient Christian rites, but it is
of dubious authority and does not purport to represent actual practice.
In describing Christianity to a pagan audience in the middle of the second
century, Justin Martyr wrote that 'because Christians are reasonable and
intelligent people, they know that God has no need of incense and therefore
worship him with prayer and thanksgiving instead'.1 A few years later
Athenagoras in a presentation of Christianity to pagans explained that
Christians do not offer sacrifices because the Creator does not require blood
nor the smell of burnt offerings or incense, God himself being 'the perfect
fragrance'.2 Also in the second century, the Letter of Barnabas called incense 'a
vain abomination' which God has abolished from worship.3
Toward the end of the ante-Nicene period, Lactantius and Eusebius of
Caesarea repeated this thought. In the early A.D. 300s Lactantius wrote that
God is pleased only by incorporeal gifts such as praise and virtues, and that
whoever tries to worship him with incense is ignorant of his nature.4 He
further stated that incense is unacceptable and ineffectual because God
requires not aromas but justice.5 Slightly later, Eusebius quoted the pagan
philosopher Porphyry in support of the proposition that nothing perceptible to
the senses is to be offered to God, especially not by burning; the proper
offerings are pure thoughts, the state of grace and self-discipline.6 By adopting
225
Incense in Ante-Nicene
Christianity
Introduction
Passing Comments
Porphyry's statement, Eusebius indicated that Christians believed that incense
played no part in divine service. When addressing the Council of Nicaea or
similar assembly around A.D. 325, the Emperor Constantine said of the
commemorations of martyrs—'a sacrifice of thanksgiving is offered...wherein
is no need of the fragrant frankincense, no need of fire'.7
Stronger statements in the same period unmistakably disclose that Christians
regarded incense to be totally forbidden for worship, both for themselves and
for pagans. Justin Martyr wrote that incense was introduced to humanity by
wicked angels in order to win their allegiance away from God.8 Tertullian
discountenanced censing in three treatises in the early A.D. 200s. His
Apologeticus denounces buying incense as wasteful, saying that the Christian
practice is to spend money on burying their dead instead of 'the fumigating of
the gods'.9 In place of 'the few grains of incense a farthing buys—tears of an
Arabian tree', Christians are to make 'that costly and noble sacrifice of
prayer'.10 In De corona he conceded that animals can be killed and incense
burned for secular purposes but not for worship.11 Such secular purposes
would include those now performed by scented aerosol sprays and other
deodorizers in the kitchen and bathroom. Such disguising scents were more
necessary before refrigeration and modern standards of cleanliness and
garbage removal. On Idolatry allows incense for 'medicinal ointments' and
'solaces of sepulture' but otherwise deprecates its use in any kind of
devotions.12 Tertullian even believed it was sinful for a Christian merchant to
sell incense because of its use in pagan rites.13
In Against the Heathen, his only extant book on Christianity, Arnobius of
Sicca in north Africa wrote more about incense than all other ante-Nicene
Christians combined. All his comments condemned censing. Writing sometime
between A.D. 304 and 311, he denounced it as heathen folly incompatible with
true worship. He stated that 'piles of incense to be burned with fire' had no
part in true devotion.14 He wrote that Christians 'do not build altars, do not
offer the blood of creatures slain in sacrifices, incense, nor sacrificial meal'.15
In addition, Arnobius devoted three chapters of his work to an uninterrupted
attack against incense in religious ceremonies, even heathen ones.'16
226 Churchman
Express Condemnations
Arnobius
Condemnation follows ridicule follows argument, all against what he called
'reeking fumes' and against the belief that God would be influenced 'a
thousand pounds of the finest incense, and the whole sky clouded with the
darkness of abundant vapours'.17 Arnobius asserted that censing was a recent
innovation even in Roman worship, unknown in the golden ages from which
Latin pagans claimed to derive their traditions18
it is almost a novelty; and there is no endless succession of years since it
began to be known in these parts, and won its way into the shines of the
gods. For neither in the heroic ages, as it is believed and declared, was it
known what incense was, as is proved by the ancient writers, in whose
books is found no mention of it....
The implication was that if incense was forbidden to pagans as contrary to
tradition, it would be more so for Christians.
There are no references to censing in Christian worship where they are to be
most expected: descriptions of the liturgy and commentaries on Scripture
passages that mention incense. The earliest descriptions are Pliny the Younger's
Letter 10.96, Justin Martyr's 1 Apology 61, 65-67, the Didache (chs. 8–10),
and the Apostolic Traditior' of Hippolytus. The only physical substances in the
first three works are bread, wine and baptismal water, but it may be argued
that Pliny and Justin could be expected to have omitted incense even if it had
been used because of the special purposes for which their two works were
written. As an investigating magistrate,19 Pliny was interested only in whether
Christians were engaged in subversive activities or planning public disorders.
He was not concerned with the fine points of rituals that did not inflict injury
or disturb the peace. Silence on the subject can also be expected from Justin
because he was giving a brief overview of Christian worship as part of assuring
his readers in the higher echelons of government that his co-religionists did not
occupy their time together in illegal or seditious activities.
On the other hand, at least allusions to incense are to be expected in the
detailed instructions for Christian worship such as the Didache and the
Apostolic Tradition, yet it is absent from both works. Indeed, in the Apostolic
Tradition Hippolytus delved into such minutiae as exorcism by breathing prior
Incense in Ante-Nicene Christianity 227
Absence of Expected Evidence
to baptism,20 liturgical use of oil,21 water at the Eucharist,22 milk and honey
accompanying the bread and wine at Communion,23 blessing of designated
species of fruit,24 offerings of specific kinds of flowers,25 and blessing of cheese
and olives.26 Omission of incense in such an exhaustive treatment of tangible
materials in church is inexplicable if it had actually been employed.
The Old Testament contains a number of passages that mention incense. Some
encourage its use while others censure it. Early Christian opposition to it is also
revealed by the church fathers' treatment of these passages, especially the
former.
The Old Testament verses condemning incense are Isaiah 1:1-14 and Isaiah
43.23. The former deprecates the sacrifices in the Temple, with God stating
that 'incense is an abomination to me'.27 The Letter of Barnabas adopts the
strictures in 1:1-14 at face value.28 Like Irenaeus,29 Clement of Alexandria
took the position that the 'odour of a sweet fragrance' commanded in Scripture
is 'the heart that glorifies Him who made it.'30 As with a similar sentiment in
Isaiah 43:23 and other references to incense in Scripture, Irenaeus'
interpretation was that the cultic provisions of the Mosaic Law are to be
interpreted figuratively, with 'incense' meaning faith, obedience and justice or
the prayers of Christians.31
Because the extant ante-Nicene Christian writers thought that Malachi 1.33
could be interpreted to advocate the use of incense in worship, they took pains
to demonstrate that it was not part of the Christian cultus. In shaming the
Jerusalem priests, Malachi had contrasted their indifference to the more
reverent attitude of the Gentiles and the Jewish laity: 'my name is great among
the nations, and in every place incense is offered to my name, and a pure
offering; for my name is great among the nations, says the LORD of hosts.'
Irenaeus' exegesis was that the 'name' which is 'great among the nations' is
that of Jesus, through whom pure offerings are made, and that the 'offerings'
are 'the prayers of saints'.32 Eusebius interpreted Malachi's 'incense' to be
Christian prayer33 or the fragrant fruit of the word which Christians offer
through prayer.34 The Christian way of offering incense is by celebrating the
Eucharist, keeping one's body free from sin, worshipping God and accepting
orthodox doctrine.35 As a proof-text Eusebius quoted Psalm 141.2a: 'Let my
228 Churchman
Incense in Ante-Nicene Exegesis
prayer be counted as incense before thee.'
In his Commentary on Canticles Hippolytus many times touched on the
incense referred to in the Song of Songs, especially 1.12-13 and 3.6. He always
interpreted it as a symbol of the church and individual Christians, e.g., it is
people who do Jesus' will who are a fragrant savour to God.36 From the
extensive reference to literal incense in this Commentary, we should expect at
least one allusion to its use in Christian worship if it had had a place there.
In his Blessings of Moses also, Hippolytus stated that in Scripture 'incense'
means 'prayer'.37 This was also the interpretation of Tertullian,38 Clement of
Alexandria39 and Eusebius.40 Eusebius also connected it with the Eucharist,41
while Clement gave the additional interpretation of 'love'.42 Origen taught that
it symbolizes justice, piety, chastity, prudence and related virtues.43
One of the longest ante-Nicene exegesis of a Scripture passage on incense is
Homily 9.8-9 in Origen's Homilies on Leviticus. There Origen taught that the
'incense' of Leviticus 16:12 represents particular virtues, and that a literal
interpretation of the verse would be crass and carnal,44 and therefore incorrect.
The various kinds of incense in the passage are allegories of orderliness and
honesty.45 According to his Homily on Leviticus 13, the incense of Leviticus
24:7 symbolizes prayer from a pure heart and upright conscience; Christians
are not to believe that God commanded them to use material incense.46
Like Eusebius, Origen cited Psalm 141:2a as an authority against the use of
material incense in Christian devotions.47 In discussing a New Testament
narrative depicting Christian use of incense, Irenaeus and Origen also
considered the 'golden bowls of incense' in Revelation 5:8 to be the prayers of
the saints and used this verse as a general proof-text that Christians are to offer
not a physical fragrance but a spiritual one.48
At his disciples' baptism Jesus made an offering of incense and prayed to his
Father and Zorokothra Melchisedek. Then he clothed them in white linen
while holding the cipher of the Seven Voices, being the number nine thousand
eight hundred seventy nine.49 To further help them attain the mysteries of the
Treasury of Light, he ritually offered incense to remove the maleficent
Incense in Ante-Nicene Christianity 229
The Exception
influence of the Archons. He had an incense altar built and placed on it
frankincense, various plants, agates and asbestos(!). The disciples were
crowned with mugwort and had frankincense placed in their mouths. 50 The
incense was to help them ascend to Jeu (Yahwoh) through twelve stages,
receiving the seal, mystery and name appropriate to each stage.
The foregoing account is from the Second Book of Jeu, an anonymous
Christian work of the first or second century A.D. Its reference to Seventy-two
Archons, the Eight Powers, the Sons of the Pleroma, the Twelve Divine Aeons
and emanations amply indicate that it is a Gnostic work. Moreover, the seals,
mysteries and names in stages of the ascent, mystic numbers and the obligation
of secrecy more resemble the hidden signs, grips, and passwords of a mystery
religion or a fraternal society than mainstream Christian practices or
symbolism. This book is therefore of negligible weight against the otherwise
unanimous testimony of the first three centuries. For that matter, it is not
evidence of censing in actual Christian worship: 2 Jeu states only that Jesus
burned incense (and asbestos!) on only one occasion; it does not state that
censing was part of the early worship of the church. Jesus did many things,
such as healing and raising the dead, which no Anglican alleges to be a proper
part of Christian liturgy.
Some historians of liturgy52 identify the first known instance of incense in
Christian use to have been in the funeral procession of Patriarch Peter of
Alexandria in A.D. 311, i.e., within the ante-Nicene period. However, records
on which these historians rely were 'compiled in their present form only in the
seventh century [and] they are quite unreliable for a detail of this kind'.53 A
similar retrojection into earlier times by a later author accounts for
Constantine's alleged donation of endowments for incense to be burnt on
Christian altars. The earliest record of this is found in the sixth-century Liber
Pontificalis, which internal evidence reveals not to antedate the fifth century.
Nor do the Apostolic Canons establish liturgical use of incense in the first three
Christian centuries. Although earlier scholars would allow an ante-Nicene
date,55 later ones opt for the late fourth century.56 Moreover, the Canons'
list of what may be offered on the Lord's table directly contradict those in
Hippolytus' Apostolic Tradition, which is admitted on all hands to date from
the second decade of the third century. While permitting incense to be
230 Churchman
offered,57 the Canons forbid milk and honey58 whereas Hippolytus gave
instructions concerning offering the latter,59 thus allowing in ante-Nicene times
what the later Canons forbade. The author(s) of the Canons could have had no
respect for the earlier tradition and quite possibly was/were unaware of its
provisions.
Conclusion
With one Gnostic exception, the extant Christian writings of the first three
centuries regard incense as alien to, and forbidden in, the worship of the
church or even in pagan rites. Authors in Carthage, Rome, Alexandria, Greece,
Syria, Gaul and Palestine were unanimous in excluding its use from the
Christian liturgy. This unanimity shows that the church of these authors was
one; their concern with the worship of God and their striving to present his will
shows that it was holy; the agreement of sources from all over the then-
Christian world show that it was catholic (universal); and their early date
implies that it was apostolic. Thus, opposition to incense in worship was the
position of the one, holy, catholic and apostolic church.
DAVID W. T. BRATTSTON is an Adjudicator of the Small Claims Court of
Nova Scotia, Canada.
ENDNOTES
Scripture quotations are from the Revised Standard Version of the Bible, copyright 1946,
1952, 1971 by the Division of Christian Education of the National Council of the
Churches of Christ in the USA. Used by permission. Except where otherwise indicated,
all translations of patristic quotations are from The Ante-Nicene Fathers ed. and trans.
A. Roberts and J. Donaldson. American reprint ed by A. C. Coxe (Buffalo, NY: Christian
Literature Publishing Co, 1885-96. Reprinted Edinburgh: T & T Clark; Grand Rapids,
MI: Eerdmans, 1986) (herein cited as ANF).
1. Justin Martyr, 1 Apologia 13.
2. Athenagoras Legatio pro Christianis 13. Trans. B. P. Pratten under title A Plea for
the Christians in ANF 2:135.
3. Epistula Barnabae 2.5. Trans. A. Roberts and J. Donaldson, Epistle of Barnabas in
ANF 1:138.
4. Lactantius, Divinae institutiones 6.25; Lactantius De ira dei 21.
5. Lactantius, Epitome 58.
Incense in Ante-Nicene Christianity 231
6. Eusebius DE (Eusebius Demonstratio evangelica) 3.3.
7. Constantine, Oratio ad sanctorum coetum 12. Trans. E. C. Richardson under the
title "The Oration of Constantine," in Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers Second
Series (N.Y.: Christian Literature Co; Oxford & London: Parker, 1890. Reprinted
Edinburgh: T & T Clark; Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1986), vol. 1, p. 571.
8. Justin Martyr, 2 Apologia 5.
9. Tertullian, Apologeticus 42. Trans S. Thelwall under title Apology in ANF 3:49.
10. Tertullian, Apologeticus 30. Trans S. Thelwall in ANF 3:42.
1l. Tertullian, De corona 10.
12. Tertullian, De idolatria 11. Trans S. Thelwall under title On Idolatry in ANF 3:67.
13. Tertullian, De idolatria 11.
14. Arnobius, AG (Arnobius of Sicca Adversus gentes, Trans. H. Bryce and H.
Campbell under title Arnobius Against the Heathen) 4.30 in ANF 6:486.
15. Arnobius, AG 6.1. Trans H. Bryce and H. Campbell in ANF 6:506.
16. Arnobius, AG 7.26-28.
17. Arnobius, AG 7.28. Trans H. Bryce and H. Campbell in ANF 6:529.
18. Arnobius, AG 7.26. Trans H. Bryce and H. Campbell in ANF 6:528.
l9. In the Continental sense, e.g., a juge d'instruction in France.
20. Hippolytus, TA (Hippolytus Traditio apostolica) 20.8.
21. Hippolytus, TA 5; 21.6-8, 10, 19; 22.2.
22. Hippolytus, TA 23.3, 7.
23. Hippolytus, TA 23.2.
24. Hippolytus, TA 2 8.1-6.
25. Hippolytus, TA 28.7
26. Hippolytus, TA 6.
27. Isaiah 1.13.
28. Epistula Barnabae 2.4-5.
29. Irenaeus, AH (Irenaeus Adversus haereses) 4. 17.2.
30. Clement of Alexandria, Pasdagogus 3.12. Trans. W. Wilson under title The
Instructor in ANF 2:293.
31. Irenaeus, AH 4. 17.3-6.
32. Irenaeus, AH 4.17.6. Trans W. H. Rambaut under title Irenaeus Against Heresies in
ANF 1:484.
33. Eusebius, DE 1.6.
34. Euseblus, DE 1.10.
35. Eusebius, DE 1.10.
36. Hippolytus, Interpretatio Cantici canticorum (De cantico) passim.
232 Churchman
37. Hippolytus, Benedictiones Moysis. Levi.
38. Tertullian, Apologeticus 30.
39. Clement of Alexandria, Stromata 7.6.
40. Eusebius, DE 1.10; Eusebius, Historia ecclesiastica 10.4.68.
41. Eusebius, DE 1. l0 .
42. Clement of Alexandria, Pacdagogus 2.8.
43. Origen, Levit (Homiliae in Leviticum) 9.8.2.
44. Origen, Levit 9.8.3.
45. Origen, Levit 9.8.4.
46. Origen, Levit 13.5.2.
47. Origen, Levit 9.8.1; 13.5.2.
48. Irenaeus, AH 4.17.6; Origen Homiliae in Ezekielem 7.4.1-4; Origen Contra Celeum
8.17.
49. 2 Jeu 4 7.
50. 2 Jeu 4 8.
51. 2 Jeu 50.
52. E. G. Cuthbert, F. Atchley, A History of the Use of Incense in Divine Worship
(London: Longmans, Green, 1909), p. [97]; Thomas A. Marsh, 'Incense, Uses of'
The New Dictionary of Sacramental Worship Peter E. Fink SJ, ed. (Collegeville,
MN: Liturgical Press, 1990), p. 595.
53. Gregory Dix, The Shape of the Liturgy (Westminster: Dacre, 1945), p. 427, n. 5.
54. Cuthbert & Atchley, A History of the Use of Incense in Divine Worship, p. 92, n.1.
55. James Donaldson, "Introductory Notice to the Constitutions of the Holy Apostles,"
in ANF 7:387-390; Henry R. Percival, "Introduction," in Nicene and Post-Nicene
Fathers Second Series (N.Y.: Christian Literature Co., 1900. Reprinted Grand
Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1983), vol. 14, p. [591] .
56. George D. Dragas, "Apostolic Constitutions" in Encyclopedia of Early Christianity
Everett Ferguson, ed., (N.Y.: & London: Garland, 1990), pp. 75-6; R. Hugh
Connolly "Introduction," in Didascalia Apostolorum (Oxford: Clarendon, 1929),
pp. xx-xxi; Burton Scott Easton, "Introduction," in The Apostolic Tradition of
Hippolytus (N.Y., Macmillan: Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1934), pp.
12-3.
57. "Apostolic Constitutions" 8.47.4.
58. "Apostolic Constitutions" 8.47.3.
59. Hippolytus, TA 23.2, 7.
Incense in Ante-Nicene Christianity 233
