CAPTURED 2026-10-09 by JD from archive.org (full-text download of the scanned volume), pasted into the orchestration thread the same day; header added by orchestration.

SOURCE: Cyril of Alexandria, Commentary on the Twelve Prophets, Volume 3, translated by Robert C. Hill, The Fathers of the Church vol. 124 (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2012). Commentary on Malachi, on 1:9-12. Printed pages 295-299 (page headers "296 CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA", "COMMENTARY ON MALACHI 1 297", "298 CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA", "COMMENTARY ON MALACHI 1 299"); Pusey edition column numbers in parentheses in the text: (562) to (566).
ARCHIVE ITEM: https://archive.org/details/cyril-of-alexandria-a-commentary-on-the-twelve-prophets
VERIFICATION: JD confirmed 2026-10-09 that the "spiritual incense ... faith, hope, love, and the ornaments of good works" passage (pp. 298-299, Pusey 565-566) is on the page. Text below is raw OCR as downloaded; known OCR errors left as-is: "five" for "fire" (twice, p. 297), stray "?" and "*" marks for footnote numbers, "of fering" split across a line break.
KEY PASSAGES (orchestration's locators, not part of the source):
  p. 297 (Pusey 563): "It is, in fact, no longer the time to sacrifice sheep; instead, the God of all is in the future honored with unbloody sacrifices."
  p. 298 (Pusey 564-565), on v.11: "He now clearly repudiates the offering of sacrifice according to the Law ... and regards the priesthood as unacceptable and the shadow as inadmissible—animal sacrifice and incense, I mean"; cites Isa 1:11-19 ("incense is an abomination to me") and Jer 7:21; Heb 9:10 "until the time comes to set things right", with "the time for reform would, in my view, be no other than the coming of our Savior."
  pp. 298-299 (Pusey 565-566): "in every place and nation pure and bloodless sacrifices will be offered to his name ... zealous in offering the pleasing odor of the spiritual incense—namely, faith, hope, love, and the ornaments of good works. This is obviously when Christ's heavenly and life-giving sacrifice is instituted".
  p. 299 (Pusey 566), on v.12: "those called from the nations will be better and more honest than those from Israel; their sacrifices will be pure, their incense fragrant" (follows directly on the spiritual-incense gloss; read in that light).

=== RAW TEXT AS DOWNLOADED ===
Now appease the person of your God, and implore him, says the Lord 
almighty; this was done by your hands. See if I welcome your approach, 
says the Lord almighty (v.9). He calls the impious to repentance, 
and very rightly says that the wrath falling on the offenders must 
be forestalled by a turn for the better. God is good, remember, 
raising up the dejected, healing the bruised, and bringing back 
the wayward.?* Now, by saying Appease the person of your God, he 
would highlight the fact, and rightly so, that God will turn away 
from those not declining to offend him, and that he averts his 
eyes, as it were, from those not seeking his glory, according 
them no pity, love, or supervision. "The eyes of the Lord are on 
the righteous," Scripture says, remember; and he said also to 
some of the sinful in the verse from Isaiah, "When you stretch 
out your hands to me, I shall avert my eyes from you; and if 
you multiply your appeals, I shall not hearken to you, for your 
hands are stained with blood." 

It is therefore necessary for sinners to appease him in the 
hope that they may somehow bring the face of God to shine 
once more on them, and divert the harm stemming from his 


22. Gn 4.7. 23. Jer 48.10. 
24. Pss 145.14; 147.3; Ezek 34.16. 25. Ps 34.16; Is 1.15. 


296 CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA 


ignoring them. He specifies the sins of the ministers, note, and 
brooks no denial, guilty of no falsehood in saying, This was done 
by your hands. (562) In other words, it is as if he were saying, 
Though not keeping silent about other sinners,” you were re- 
sponsible for impious actions against me as though personally 
involved, and they were the results of your indifference, since 
none of you intervened. If, on the other hand, some people are 
perhaps reluctant to bring charges against you on these mat- 
ters, I shall not be like you and one of them, nor would I respect 
the person of the impious. The verse from David resembles this, 
"You undertook iniquity in the belief I was like you; I shall ac- 
cuse you, and to your face I shall present your sins."?? The judge 
does not discriminate between persons, you see; being God, he 
is honest and incorruptible. 

Hence the doors will be closed on you, and you will not light a fire on 
my altar in vain (v.10). He very appropriately forecasts the beau- 
ty of life in Christ by way of a prophecy: the shadow in the Law 
and that ancient priesthood would soon come to an end, and 
the ministers of truth, who would also be servants of the wor- 
ship in spirit and ardently seek the glory of God, would in due 
course be revealed. He says the doors will be closed on the former, 
and no fragrance will be associated with those serving as priests 
according to the Law: *If he closes the doors against someone, 
who will open them?"? In other words, when the true taber- 
nacle is revealed—namely, the Church—those still perform- 
ing priestly duties according to the Law will not enter, being 
shut out as a result of unbelief, will remain outside, and will not 
light holy things. The fact that (563) they have forfeited priest- 
hood, you see, would be clear from God's statement in Hosea, 
“The people of Israel shall remain for many days without king, 
without ruler, without sacrifice, without altar, without priest- 
hood, without divination.” He would therefore be indicating 
the lapse, as it were, of worship according to the Law, and the 


26. The negative does not appear in the clause in the PG text (understand- 
ably). 

27. Ps 50.21. 28. Jb 12.14. 

29. Hos 3.4. Cyril is not acknowledging the eighth-century situation of the 
northern kingdom referred to by Hosea in applying this verse to Malachi's com- 
munity and beyond it to NT worship. 


COMMENTARY ON MALACHI 1 297 


closure of priesthood according to it, in my view, when he says 
there was need to close the doors on them, since the Church does 
not admit them, so to say. It is, in fact, no longer the time to 
sacrifice sheep; instead, the God of all is in the future honored 
with unbloody sacrifices. 

Now, since he proceeds to follow this with the statement, You 
will not light a fire on my altar in vain, our claim is that the mean- 
ing has moved to moral considerations. He wants to indicate, 
in fact, that they had been called to priesthood and to putting 
five on the altar not for the purpose of undermining the glory 
of the one who called them, but to honor him in appropriate 
ways and enjoy the privileges of priesthood. They did not at- 
tend to such august pursuits, however, nor were they deterred 
by respect for sacrifice from offending God, and would then be 
justly punished. It would, in fact, be no small accusation, and 
well deserved, to set at nothing the share in the gifts of God and 
divest themselves inadvisedly of the honors from God; Esau, for 
example, was called earthy and profane because “he surren- 
dered his birthright for a single dish." When he says, then, You 
will not light a fire on my altar in vain, he means to say that while 
the priesthood is not without its recompense, one would not 
escape punishment unless one were to discharge it in the right 
and proper fashion. 

It should be noted, on the other hand, that the Hebrew text 
yields a different (564) sense and even a different context. It 
says, The Levites and priests who have the lowest ranking in the 
Temple and are charged by you with closing the doors will not 
light a five on my altar in vain; that is, you do not perform the 
service (or priesthood) for nothing, since the people offer you 
tithes, first-fruits, and thanksgiving offerings. 

In return for your neglect of the things of God, then, and 
for their not being given precedence, I have no pleasure in you, 
says the Lord almighty, and shall not accept sacrifice from your hands. 
Hence, from the rising of the sun to its setting, my name has been glo- 
rified among the nations, and in every place incense is offered to my 
name and a pure offering; because my name is great among the nations, 
says the Lord almighty (v.11). He now clearly repudiates the offer- 


30. Heb 12.16. 


298 CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA 


ing of sacrifice according to the Law, and, as it were, abandons 
his love for Jews, and regards the priesthood as unacceptable 
and the shadow as inadmissible—animal sacrifice and incense, 
I mean—this not being his original intention. He makes this 
clear also in other prophets, as when he says in the statement 
of Isaiah, “I am fed up with burnt offerings of rams; fat of sheep 
and blood of bulls and goats I do not want, not even if you come 
to appear before me. After all, who asked this from your hands? 
Do not continue trampling on my court. (565) If you bring the 
best of flour, it is a waste of time; incense is an abomination 
to me.” And in Jeremiah, “Assemble your burnt offerings along 
with your sacrifices and eat the meat, because I did not speak 
to your fathers about burnt offerings and sacrifices on the day 
I brought them up out of the land of Egypt.”*! The Law, you 
see, was a prefiguring and foretelling of worship in spirit and 
in truth, and “regulations for the body,” as the divinely inspired 
Paul writes, *until the time comes to set things right." Now, the 
time for reform would, in my view, be no other than the coming 
of our Savior. The first covenant, on account of its not being 
faultless, is said to have disappeared, being obsolete; a place was 
sought for a new and second one, which would be proof against 
any blame or fault. This, in fact, is said by the Son himself, who 
bears the name also of Angel of Great Counsel—hence his say- 
ing, “I do not speak of myself: the Father who sent me is the one 
who gave me instructions as to what to speak and what to say.”*” 

Accordingly, he clearly told those exercising priesthood ac- 
cording to the Law that they are unacceptable to him or, rather, 
I have no pleasure in them as they perform sacrifices in shadow and 
type, and that he would not accept what was offered by them. He 
predicts that his name will be great and famous among people ev- 
erywhere throughout the earth under heaven, and that in every 
place and nation pure and bloodless sacrifices will be offered to 
his name, now that the ministers no longer diminish his honor 
or pay him spiritual worship in indifferent fashion. Instead, with 
enthusiasm, simplicity, and holiness they will be zealous in of 
fering the pleasing odor of the spiritual incense—(566) namely, 


31. Is 1.11—19; Jer 7.21. 
32. Heb 9.10; Jn 4.23; Heb 8.7, 13; Is 9.6; Jn 12.49. 


COMMENTARY ON MALACHI 1 299 


faith, hope, love, and the ornaments of good works. This is obvi- 
ously when Christ’s heavenly and life-giving sacrifice is institut- 
ed, through which death is destroyed, and this corruptible flesh 
from the earth puts on incorruptibility.? 

You by contrast profane it in saying, The table of the Lord. is spoiled, 
and the food on it is of no value (v.12). In this he also makes clear 
to us that those called from the nations will be better and more 
honest than those from Israel; their sacrifices will be pure, their 
incense fragrant, and his name will be great from east to west, 
whereas among you (he says) the altar is not held in the high 
regard that befits God.