CAPTURED 2026-08-24, 3:30 PM ET, by JD, from the Discord client.

Concerning Hyper-Reformed Tests for Assurance
Athanasius325 / Fr James
OP
 — 8/19/26, 1:17 PM
I think twice in this series I have spoken about certain Puritans/Reformed who had a test for assurance of election that went along these lines: 

If I am unsure of my election, I can look to my desire for God. If my desire for God is so pure that I am even willing to be damned in order to Glorify God even more, then I know that I am elect. 

I could not recall where, exactly, that theology came from, so I decided to look into it more. It comes from the "New Divinity" form of Reformed theology, which springs from Edwards and is developed by men such as Samuel Hopkins. One example of this comes from Hopkins' book, "The Nature of True Holiness", Section VI, IV.6: 

We  may  also  observe  from  this  passage,  though  it  is  not immediately  to  the  point  we  are  upon, that  the  holy  love  by which  Christians  are  distinguished  from  others  will  love  God, even  though  he  were  our  enemy ;  therefore  it  is not necessary we  should  see  him  to  be  our  friend,  or  that  he  loves  us,  in order  to  our  loving  him.  They  who  hold  this,  and  that  all true love  to  God  is  of  this  kind,  teach  a  selfish  religion,  directly contrary  to  what  Christ  taught,  and  which  he  said  publicans and  sinners might  have  as  well  as  Christians.  If  we  cannot be Christ's  disciples  unless  we  have  a  heart  to  love  our  enemies, even  such  as are so unjustly,  and  are  doing  us  all  the injury  they  can,  then  none  are  his  disciples  who  have  not  a heart  to  love  God,  even  though  he  is  their  enemy,  and  disposed to curse  and  destroy  them,  who  cannot  be  an  unjust  and  injurious enemy. Surely  that  disposition  which  will  love  an enemy,  who  is  unjustly  and  injuriously  so,  will  not  find  it hard  to  love  an  enemy  who  is  so  with  the  highest  reason  and justice. (continued...)
Athanasius325 / Fr James
OP
 — 8/19/26, 1:18 PM
...And  all  true  love  to  God  is  of  this  kind.  It  is  such a generous,  disinterested,  benevolent  affection,  that  it  is  so  far from  originating from a  belief  of  his  love  to  us,  that  we  should continue  to  love  him,  even  though  he  appeared  to  be  our  enemy;  and  that  love  which would  fail  in  this  case  is  not  true holiness.  Therefore,  it  is  certain  that  he  who  does  not  love his  enemies  does  not  love  God  with  a  true, holy  love.  This is,  at  least,  implicitly  asserted  here  by  our  Savior.
JD Smith — 8:54 AM
This is interesting, and I'd agree with the critique. That test isn't the Westminster account. WCF 18 grounds assurance in the divine promises, the inward evidence of grace, and the witness of the Spirit, and there's nothing of that kind anywhere in it. Hopkins is a good deal downstream of the Assembly (~150 years later). I'm not well studied on the New Divinity but as I understand it it was contested in Presbyterianism and never broadly accepted in confessional Reformed circles.

Since it came up the other night I was wondering though, how would you say we can have assurance? 
Athanasius325 / Fr James
OP
 — 11:54 AM
Yes, it doesn't necessarily flow from the WCF. 

I have assurance because of the Promises of God given in Baptism. I know that Christ died for me, because I know that Christ died for all.
JD Smith — 12:02 PM
Question - if those two are the only basis of assurance, couldn’t an apostate person who has been baptized say the same (eg the excommunicated adulterer - or even one who hasn’t been excommunicated yet persists in unrepentant sin) - that he has assurance because of the promises of God given in baptism, and that he knows Christ died for him because he knows Christ died for all? What would you say gives you assurance that the apostate doesn’t have in common with you?

What about one who simply was baptized but has never placed their faith in Christ, or perhaps they never even heard the Gospel at all - will they be saved regardless, merely because they were baptized and Christ died for them though they may not know it or believe it? 