CAPTURE HEADER — added by pass 260835-56, not part of the source.
Source: Project Canterbury, "Report on Ritualism by the Committee of Five Bishops (c. 1868)"
URL: https://anglicanhistory.org/usa/report_ritualism1868.html
Retrieved: 2026-09-05 by pass 260835-56 via web_fetch.
Project Canterbury's own bibliographic line: "No place: no publisher, no date, c. 1868."
Bracketed numerals such as [1/2] and [4] are Project Canterbury's printed-page
break markers, reproduced as transcribed.
CAUTION recorded at capture: the "c. 1868" date is Project Canterbury's conjecture.
The document's own text says the Committee was appointed at the General Convention
of 1868 and directed "to report to the next General Convention," and then recommends
"action by the present General Convention" — i.e. the Convention it is addressing is
the one AFTER 1868 (1871), not 1868 itself. See §3 of
Ceremonial_Meaning_Source_Checks.md.
RESOLVED (added later in pass 260835-56): the conjecture "c. 1868" is WRONG.
The Committee was appointed by the Presiding Bishop on 29 October 1868 and
this Report was presented to the House of Bishops by the Bishop of Delaware
(Alfred Lee) on Thursday 5 October 1871, the second day of the General
Convention at Baltimore. It is printed as Appendix IX, pp. 598-601, of the
Journal of the 1871 General Convention, under the title "Report of the Special
Committee appointed by the House of Bishops, 1868, on Ritual Uniformity."
The correct date for the document is 1871. See
SRC_PRIMARY_1871_GeneralConvention_Journal_Five-Bishops-Ritual-Report.txt
in this directory for the journal evidence.
=====================================================================

Project Canterbury

Report on Ritualism by the Committee
of Five Bishops.

No place: no publisher, no date, c. 1868.

---

REPORT

THE Committee of Five Bishops appointed by the House of Bishops,
at the General Convention of 1868, "To consider whether
any additional provision for uniformity, by canon or otherwise,
is practicable and expedient, and to report to the next General
Convention," having held sundry meetings at several different
places, at each of which all the members of the Committee were
present through the entire session; and having, as they believe,
given to the subject-matter entrusted to them, that careful consideration
which its importance merits, respectfully ask leave to report.

The Resolution under which the Committee was appointed raises
several questions for examination and answer. Is any legislation
touching the performance of Divine Service and "the administration
of the Sacraments and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,"
practicable? If practicable, is it, at this time, expedient?
If practicable and expedient, shall it take the shape of a canon
or canons; or shall it be otherwise provided for? And, finally,
what shall the actual details of legislation be? Assuredly, these
are questions that touch the Church, and its ministers and members,
in many and very vital points, and involve many delicate as well
as precious relations.

In considering these questions, the Committee have endeavored
never to forget that substantial uniformity is entirely compatible
with very considerable individual liberty; that non-essentials
should never be unduly magnified, and, far less, raised to an
equality with [1/2] essentials, that many troublesome and objectionable
things are ephemeral in their nature, and "perish in the
using"; and that under any circumstances, hasty legislation
is ever to be avoided. Nor have they omitted to keep in mind
the wise words of the XXXIVth Article of Religion:

"It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be
in all places one or utterly like; for at all times they have
been divers, and may be changed according to the diversity of
countries, times, and men's manners, so that nothing be ordained
against God's Word."

"Every particular or national Church hath authority to
ordain, change, and abolish, Ceremonies or Rites of the Church
ordained only by man's authority, so that all things be done
to edifying."

While, however, the Committee have kept these considerations
in view, it has been, and is, their unanimous conviction that
some action of the General Convention, in regard to the important
matters named in the resolution appointing them, is very desirable,
if not, indeed, absolutely demanded. Among many reasons for this
conviction that present themselves, they venture to ask attention
to the three following:

First. It is obvious to remark that there are among us great
and growing "diversities of use," in the performance
of Divine Service and the Offices of the Church. Unless something
is done, and done soon, in the interests of uniformity, these
diversities bid fair to equal, if they do not exceed, those which,
at the period of the Anglican Reformation, were regarded as an
evil to be removed; and which led to the decision that "the
whole realm" should have "but one use." They occasion,
moreover, even now, confusion, trouble, and perplexity, among
our people; and these evils must increase as their causes are
multiplied.

Secondly. It is believed that various services over and above
those provided in the Book of Common Prayer, or set forth in
accordance with the provisions of Title I, Canon 13, § XIV.,
of the Digest, and not coming under the denomination of Sunday
or other [2/3] school services, are publicly used in certain
churches How fat liberty in this regard is to be allowed, or
in what respects it is to be restrained, the Committee do not
undertake to say. It is obvious, however, that any such services
are sources of disorder and confusion, in proportion as they
are framed on principles and embody acts, words, or forms--come
these from what outside quarter they may--that are not in accord
with the "doctrine, discipline, and worship" of our
own Church, or are foreign to the genius and spirit of our services.

Thirdly. The Committee have reason to believe, that in some
instances the Services of the Prayer Book are unlawfully altered
or mutilated, and in others are so performed as to make it difficult,
to say the least, to distinguish them, except in the language
employed, from those of the Church of Rome. Against such wrongs
our people have a right to demand protection; and whether they
demand it or not, it would seem to be a plain and bounden duty
to provide for it.

For these reasons, besides others which it is not necessary
to rehearse, the Committee unanimously recommend action by the
present General Convention; and, after maturely weighing the
different modes in which this recommendation may be carried out,
they further unanimously recommend, that any action which the
Convention may take shall be in the form of a canon or canons.

In proceeding to state the various details which they believe
ought to be made the subjects of such action as has been proposed,
the Committee desire to say, that while on the great majority
of the points presented there has been entire unanimity of opinion,
some things are, nevertheless, proposed, and others are omitted,
which, had each member's individual wish regulated the final
result, would have been differently disposed of. They have strongly
felt that uniformity necessarily involves the giving up of some
things, and the acceptance of other things which individuals
may desire, on the one hand, to retain, or, on the other, to
remove.

The Committee report the following as the matters upon which
they respectfully recommend legislation:

[4] The recommend that certain acts in the administration
of the Holy Communion, and on other occasions of public worship,
hereinafter enumerated, be prohibited by canon; to wit:

(1) The use of Incense

(2) Placing or retaining a Crucifix in any part of the Church

(3) Carrying a Cross in procession in the Church

(4) The use of Lights on or about the Holy Table, except when
necessary

(5) The Elevation of the Elements in the Holy Communion in
such manner as to expose them to the view of the people as objects
toward which adoration is to be made, in or after the prayer
of Consecration, or in the act of administering them, or in conveying
them to or from the communicants

(6.) The mixing of water with the wine as part of the service,
or in presence of the congregation.

(7.) The washing of the Priest's hands, or the ablution of
the vessels, in the presence of the congregation.

(8.) Bowings, crossings, genuflections, prostrations, reverences,
bowing down upon or kissing the Holy Table, and kneeling, except
as allowed, provided for, or directed, by rubric or canon; it
being provided that reverence at the mention of the name of the
Lord Jesus is not intended to be disallowed; and it being further
provided that private personal devotion, before or after official
ministration, is not to be understood to include or justify any
of the acts prohibited.

(9.) The celebration or receiving of the Holy Communion by
any Bishop or Priest when no person receives with him.

(10.) Employing or permitting any person or persons not in
Holy Orders to assist the Minister in any part of the Order for
the administration of the Holy Communion.

[5] (11.) Using, at any administration of the Holy Communion,
any Prayers, Collects, Gospels, or Epistles other than those
provided in the Book of Common Prayer, or under § XIV. of
Canon 13 of Title I. of the Digest.

They further recommend here,

(1.) That no Rector of a Parish or other Minister shall be
allowed to introduce the Choral Service without the consenting
vote of the Vestry, or contrary to the prohibition of the Bishop.

(2.) That no Surpliced Choir shall be employed except under
the same limitations; and when such Choirs are employed, the
only addition to their ordinary attire shall be a surplice reaching
to the ankles.

(a.) That no Chancel shall be allowed to be so arranged as
to prevent the Minister from officiating at the right end of
the Holy Table. It is to be noted that a Credence Table is lawful.

II.

The Committee further recommend that canonical provision be
made touching the dress appropriate to clergymen ministering
in the congregation; and that the only vestments declared to
be appropriate to clergymen so ministering, be:

(1.) For Bishops, the present Episcopal Robes.

(2.) For all Ministers, a white Surplice; a black or white
Stole; a black Cassock not reaching below the ankles; a black
Gown; and Bands.

They also recommend that provision be made:

(1.) That on occasions of services, where expediency or necessity
of health may require it, the University Cap may be used.

(2.) That candidates for Orders, who are licensed to act as
Lay Readers, may use the academical black Gown.

[6] III.

In addition to the canonical provisions now recommended, and
in consideration of the fact that "nothing can be so plainly
set forth but doubts may arise in the use and practice of the
same," the Committee further unanimously recommend that
some action be taken to carry out, in such manner as may secure
its observance, the principle declared in the Second Resolution
sent to this House by the House of Clerical and Lay Deputies,
at the General Convention of 1868, to wit: That "In all
matters doubtful, reference shall be made to the Ordinary, and
no changes shall be made against the godly counsel and judgment
of the Bishop."

In conclusion, the Committee recommend the adoption of the
following Resolutions:

*Resolved*, That this Report be communicated to the House
of Clerical and Lay Deputies.

*Resolved*, The House of Clerical and Lay Deputies concurring,
that a Joint Committee, consisting of three Bishops, three Presbyters,
and three Laymen, be appointed, to whom the subject matter of
this Report shall be referred, with directions to report to this
Convention, at as early a day as practicable, such Canons as
they may deem necessary in the premises.

All which is respectfully submitted.

ALFRED LEE,
J. WILLIAMS,
T.M. CLARK,
W. H. ODENHEIMER,
J. B. KERFOOT.

---

[Project Canterbury](http://anglicanhistory.org/)
