CAPTURE HEADER — added by pass 260835-56, not part of the source.
Source: SECOND REPORT OF THE COMMISSIONERS APPOINTED TO INQUIRE INTO THE
  RUBRICS, ORDERS, AND DIRECTIONS FOR REGULATING THE COURSE AND CONDUCT OF
  PUBLIC WORSHIP, &c. ACCORDING TO THE USE OF THE UNITED CHURCH OF ENGLAND
  AND IRELAND. WITH MINUTES OF EVIDENCE AND APPENDICES.
  Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command of Her Majesty.
  London: Printed by George Edward Eyre and William Spottiswoode, Printers to
  the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, for Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1868.
  [Command paper 4016; HC (1867-8) xxxviii. Pagination xxiii + 685.]
  Commonly called the SECOND REPORT OF THE RITUAL COMMISSION.
Digitised copy: Internet Archive item
  "second-report-of-the-commissioners-appointed-to-inquire-into-the-rubrics-orders-"
  URL: https://archive.org/details/second-report-of-the-commissioners-appointed-to-inquire-into-the-rubrics-orders-
  (OCR derivative *_djvu.txt; uploaded 2024-05-26; Public Domain Mark 1.0)
Retrieved 2026-09-05 by pass 260835-56.
Text below transcribed from the Internet Archive OCR of the printed Report.
OCR ARTEFACTS: the scan reads "APPENDICKS" for APPENDICES, "Bresented" for
  Presented, "Connen" for "Connop" (Thirlwall), "J.ights" for "Lights",
  "forthwitit" for "forthwith", "Meibers" for "Members", "Incerise" for
  "Incense", "in cameré / camerdé" for "in camera", "torender" for "to render",
  "agerieved" for "aggrieved", "Kast" for "East", "Karl" for "Earl",
  "Smitb"/"Humpiry"/"I. Venn" for Smith/Humphry/H. Venn. Stray running-head
  numerals (192, 197-205, "XV", "3", "4", "5", "6") are printer's page and
  folio marks reproduced as OCR'd. Obvious OCR noise between sections
  (e.g. "ak / oe / a / ce", "AR PRI REST CER", "ZU0", "Le") is retained where
  it fell so the transcription is not silently smoothed.
SCOPE OF CAPTURE: the Commission (Letters Patent, 3 June 1867), the Second
  Report proper (paragraphs 1-13), the signatures, and the full dissents and
  reservations, ending with the Secretary's dating. The Minutes of Proceedings,
  Minutes of Evidence and Appendices (the bulk of the 685pp volume) are NOT
  captured here; the opening of the Minutes of Proceedings is included only to
  document the date and the attendance format.
LOAD-BEARING POINT (recorded at capture): the operative recommendation on
  incense is paragraph 7. Its exact wording is
  "we are of opinion that it is expedient to restrain in the public services of
  the Church all variations from established usage in respect of Lighted
  Candles and of Incense."
  The rendering that circulates in secondary literature — "to restrain all
  variations from established usage in respect to the use of lighted candles
  and incense in the public services of the Church" — is NOT the Report's
  wording. It is G. Bayfield Roberts, The History of the English Church Union
  1859-1894 (London: Church Printing, 1895), ch. "1867-68", which places it in
  quotation marks. Roberts reorders the clause, writes "in respect to" for
  "in respect of", inserts "the use of", and drops the capitalisation. Cite
  paragraph 7 as above, not Roberts.
=====================================================================

SECOND REPORT

OF

THE COMMISSIONERS

APPOINTED TO INQUIRE INTO THE

RUBRICS, ORDERS, AND DIRECTIONS FOR REGULATING
THE COURSE AND CONDUCT OF PUBLIC WORSHIP, &c.

ACCORDING TO THE USE OF THE UNITED CHURCH OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND.

WITH

MINUTES OF EVIDENCE

AND

APPENDICKS.

Bresented to both Mouses of Parliament by Command of Her Majesty,

LONDON:

PRINTED BY GEORGE EDWARD EYRE AND WIULIAM SPOTTISWOODE,
PRINTERS TO THE QUEEN'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
FOR HER MAJESTY'S STATIONERY OFFICE,

1868.

192

CONTENTS.

COMMISSION - - - - - Page iii
SECOND REPORT, AND DISSENTS  - - vii
MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS - - - xv
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE - - - 4
APPENDICES - - - - - - 27

---------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMISSION.

VICTORIA R.

VICTORIA, by the Grace of God of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland
Queen, Defender of the Faith,

To the Most Reverend Father in God, Our right trusty and right entirely-beloved
Councillor, Charles Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury; the Most Reverend Father in
God, Our right trusty and right entirely-beloved Councillor Marcus Gervais, Archbishop
of Armagh; Our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin Philip Henry, Earl Stan-
hope; Our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Councillor Dudley, Earl of
Harrowby, Knight of Our most Noble Order of the Garter; Our right trusty and right
well-beloved Cousin Frederick, Earl Beauchamp ; the Right Reverend Father in God, Our
right trusty and well-beloved Councillor Archibald Campbell, Bishop of London; the
Right Reverend Father in God Connen [OCR: Connop], Bishop of Saint David's; the Right Reverend
Father in God Samuel, Bishop of Oxford; the Right Reverend Father in God Charles
John, Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol; Our right trusty and well-beloved Edward
Berkeley, Baron Portman; Our right trusty and well-beloved Councillor Robert, Baron
Ebury ; Our right trusty and well-beloved Councillor Spencer Horatio Walpole; Our
right trusty and well-beloved Councillor Edward Cardwell; Our right trusty and well-
beloved Councillor Sir Joseph Napier, Baronet; Cur trusty and well-beloved Sir William
Page Wood, Knight, a Vice-Chancellor ; Our trusty and well-beloved Sir Robert Joseph
Phillimore, Knight, Doctor of Civil Law, Our Advocate; Our trusty and well-beloved
Travers Twiss, Doctor of Civil Law; Our trusty and well-beloved John Duke Coleridge,
Esquire, One of Our Counsel learned in the Law; Our trusty and well-beloved John
Abel Smith, Esquire ; Our trusty and well-beloved Alexander James Beresford Beresford-
Hope, Esquire; Our trusty and well-beloved John Gellibrand Hubbard, Esquire; Our
trusty and well-beloved Arthur Penrhyn Stanley, Doctor in Divinity, Dean of Our Colle-
giate Church of Westminster ; Our trusty and well-beloved Harvey Goodwin, Doctor in
Divinity, Dean of Our Cathedral Church of Ely; Our trusty and well-beloved James
Amiraux Jeremie, Doctor in Divinity, Dean of Our Cathedral Church of Lincoln, Regius
Professor of Divinity in Our University of Cambridge; Our trusty and well-beloved
Robert Payne Smith, Doctor in Divinity, Regius Professor of Divinity in Our University
of Oxford; Our trusty and well-beloved Henry Venn, Clerk, Bachelor in Divinity ; Our
trusty and well-beloved William Gilson Humphry, Clerk, Bachelor in Divinity ; Our
trusty and well-beloved Robert Gregory, Clerk; and Our trusty and well-beloved
Thomas Walter Perry, Clerk; Greeting.

@hercas [Whereas] it has been represented unto Us that Differences of Practice have arisen
from varying Interpretations put upon the Rubrics, Orders, and Directions for regulating
the Course and Conduct of Public Worship, the Administration of the Sacraments, and
the other Services contained in the Book of Common Prayer, according to the Use of
the United Church of England and Ireland, and more especially with reference to the
Ornaments used in the Churches and Chapels of the said United Church and the
Vestments worn by the Ministers thereof at the tim[e] ...

[Capture note: the intervening text of the Letters Patent was not transcribed in
this capture. The instrument closes:]

... to use, from time to time, as occasion may require.

Given at Our Court at Saint James's, the third day of June, one thousand eight
hundred and sixty-seven, in the thirtieth year of Our Reign,

By Her Majesty's Command,
GATHORNE HARDY.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
SECOND REPORT.

TO THE QUEEN'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.

1. Since we made our First Report to Your Majesty in relation to the Vestments worn
by the ministers of the United Church of England and Ireland at the time of their
ministration, we have proceeded to consider the other part of the subject pointed out in
Your Majesty's Commission as the most pressing.

2. The use of Lighted Candles in celebrating the Holy Communion, when they are
not needed for the purpose of giving light, and the use of Incense in the public services
of the Church, are the matters connected with this part of the subject to which our
attention has been mainly directed.

3. We have taken evidence and have availed ourselves of the information furnished by
the arguments in the recent suits before the Court of Arches of Martin v. Mackonochie
and Flamank v. Simpson, both in respect of Lights used at the celebration of the Holy
Communion, and also in respect of the use of Incense as part of the public services of the
Church.

4. The use of Lighted Candles at the celebration of the Holy Communion has been
introduced into certain Churches within a period of about the last twenty-five years. It
is true that there have been Candlesticks with Candles on the Lord's Table during a long
period in many Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and Chapels, and also in the Chapels
of some Colleges, and of some Royal and Episcopal Residences, but, the instances that
have been adduced to prove that Candles have been lighted, as accessories to the Holy
Communion, are few and much contested.

5. With regard to Parish Churches, whatever evidence there may be as to Candle-
sticks with Candles being on the Lord's Table, no sufficient evidence has been adduced
before us to prove that at any time during the last three centuries Lighted Candles
have been used in any of these Churches as accessories to the celebration of the Holy
Communion until within about the last twenty-five years.

6. The use of Incense in the public services of the Church during the present century
is very recent, and the instances of its introduction are very rare; and so far as we have
any evidence before us, it is at variance with the Church's usage for 300 years.

7. Under these circumstances, and in conformity with the principles which guided us
in our First Report, we are of opinion that it is expedient to restrain in the public
services of the Church all variations from established usage in respect of Lighted Candles
and of Incense.

8. With regard, then, to Lights and Incense, as well as Vestments, we think that a
speedy and inexpensive remedy should be provided for parishioners aggrieved by their
introduction ; and the remedy which we recommend is the following : —first, that when-
soever it shall be found necessary that order be taken concerning the same, the usage of
the Church of England and Ireland as above stated to have prevailed for the last 300
years shall be deemed to be the rule of the Church, in respect of Vestments, Lights, and
Incense; and, secondly, that parishioners may make formal application to the Bishop
in camerá [in camera], and the Bishop on such application shall be bound to enquire into the matter
of the complaint, and if it shall thereby appear that there has been a variation from
established usage, by the introduction of Vestments, Lights, or Incense in the public
services of the Church, he shall take order forthwith for the discontinuance of such
variation, and be enabled to enforce the same summarily. We also think that the
determination of the Bishop on such application should be subject to appeal to the Arch-
bishop of the Province in camerá, whose decision thereon shall be final: Provided always,
that if it should appear to either party that the decision of the Bishop or Archbishop is
open to question on any legal ground, a case may be stated by the party dissatisfied, to
be certified by the Bishop or Archbishop as correct, and then submitted by the said party
for the decision of the Court of the Archbishop without pleading or evidence, with a
right of appeal to Your Majesty in Council, and with power for the Court, if the statement
of the case should appear to be in any way defective, to refer back such case to the
Bishop or Archbishop for amendment.

9. Precautions should be taken against frivolous applications being brought before the
Bishop ; and with this view, we further recommend that the application should be made
either by one or more of the Church or Chapel Wardens, or by at least five resident
parishioners, who shall be householders and declare themselves to be members of the
United Church, in places where the population exceeds 1,000, and by at least three
such persons where the population is less than that number.

10. Our intention, in making this recommendation, is simply to provide, for parishioners
aggrieved by the introduction of variations from established usage in respect of Vest-
ments, Lights, and Incense, a special facility for restraining such variations, without
interfering in other respects with the general law of the Church as to Ornaments, or the
ordinary remedies now in force.

11. In submitting these recommendations to Your Majesty, we desire to state that we are
anxious in no degree to abridge or curtail any of the rightful liberties heretofore enjoyed
by the Clergy and Laity of the United Church. The National Church may well include
men of varying shades of opinion, so long as they can combine in a conscientious acceptance
of her recognized formularies and appointed rites. But this large comprehension seems
to us to render it most desirable that in the celebration of the Church's rites there shall be
introduced no novel practices, which are welcome only to some, but are offensive to others.
All members of the Church being expected to join devoutly in one common form and
order of service are, as we conceive, entitled to expect that no unaccustomed form be
used giving to the service a new tendency and significance by which the devotion of many
is impeded.

12. We have made some progress in the Revision of the Rubrics, Orders, and
Directions contained in the Book of Common Prayer, and our recommendations on this
subject will be presented to Your Majesty in our next Report. A Committee of the
Commission has been for some time engaged in preparing materials for the Revision of
the Lectionary.

13. In the Appendix to this Report will be found the Evidence taken before us, and
the Arguments of Counsel as well as the Judgment of the Official Principal of the Court
of Arches in the cases of Martin v. Mackonochie and Flamank v. Simpson.

C. T. CANTUAR. (L.S.)            [Charles Thomas Longley, Abp of Canterbury]
MARCUS G. ARMAGH. (L.S.)         [Marcus Gervais Beresford, Abp of Armagh]
STANHOPE. (L.S.)
HARROWBY. (L.S.)
A. C. LONDON. (L.S.)             [Archibald Campbell Tait, Bp of London]
C. ST. DAVID'S. (L.S.)           [Connop Thirlwall]
+S. OXON. (L.S.)                 [Samuel Wilberforce]
C. J. GLOUCESTER & BRISTOL. (L.S.)  [Charles John Ellicott]
PORTMAN. (L.S.)
EBURY. (L.S.)
SPENCER H. WALPOLE (L.S.)
EDWARD CARDWELL. (L.S.)
JOSEPH NAPIER. (L.S.)
WILLIAM PAGE WOOD. (L.S.)
TRAVERS TWISS. (L.S.)
*JOHN DUKE COLERIDGE. (L.S.)
JOHN ABEL SMITH. (L.S.)
*A. P. STANLEY. (L.S.)
+H. GOODWIN. (L.S.)
J. A. JEREMIE. (L.S.)
R. PAYNE SMITH. (L.S.)
HENRY VENN. (L.S.)
W. G. HUMPHRY. (L.S.)

[Capture note: 23 signatures. The dagger (+) marks the two signatories whose
partial dissent follows immediately; the asterisk (*) marks the two whose
reservation follows after that.]

---------------------------------------------------------------------
+ In appending our names to this Report, we the undersigned members of Your Majesty's
Commission, are compelled to dissent from the recommendations contained in the para-
graphs 8 and 9.

We are of opinion that continued usage in ordinary circumstances ought in matters
ceremonial to be so far the rule as to protect unwilling parishioners from arbitrary
change, even though the change may seem to be within the letter of the law; but we
cannot approve of any attempt to stereotype by legislation for perpetual observance any
use not actually enjoined. Such legislation even thirty years ago would have prohibited
much which is now generally adopted, and all but universally approved. We cannot
advise the introduction of a new rule of Ornaments for the Established Church.
We think such a rule unnecessary, and we believe that the attempt to introduce it would
be dangerous. We deprecate particular enactments on these subjects; and we are
of opinion that offence, whether caused by excess or defect in divine service, may be
removed by strengthening the hands of the Bishop, with appeal to the Archbishop.

We are convinced that the Ritual of the Church must be regulated by living authority,
acting, as such authority always must act, under a strong sense of individual responsibility
and under public observation, although the complete avoidance of offence must after all
depend upon the prevalence of good sense and good feeling in each parish ; even if all the
greater circumstances of ceremonial could be distinctly fixed by law, there must still
remain questions of gesture and posture which may involve much offence, but which no
law can completely regulate.

S. OXON.
H. GOODWIN.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
We the undersigned members of Your Majesty's Commission, concurring in the
Opinions above expressed, feel ourselves thereby precluded from appending our signatures
to the Report.

ROBERT J. PHILLIMORE.
A. J. B. BERESFORD HOPE.
J. G. HUBBARD.
R. GREGORY.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
* We beg leave, in adding our names to the Report, to lay before Your Majesty the
following considerations, which we think ought to be embodied in any recommendations
on the subject to which the Report refers.

The Church of England has always contained within it two parties, one caring much
for outward observance and ceremonial, the other careless about or even hostile to them ;
and these two historical parties represent two classes of minds which always have and
probably always will exist, and proclaim their existence, in a free country. If, therefore, the
Church of England is to remain the National Establishment of a free country, room for
both must be found in it, as far as is consistent with general uniformity "in such Matters
"as may be deemed essential." Within such limits a variety and elasticity of outward
observance appears to us to be desirable. We will not join in any recommendations
which have for their single object the attainment in the services of the Church of a rigid
uniformity in matters not essential.

The present Report to Your Majesty is concerned only with two matters,—the use of
Incense and of Lighted Candles. We venture to submit that we cannot consider either
the retention or the suppression of these two articles amongst the matters to be deemed
essential. They have in themselves, and in their origin, no doctrinal significance ;
and the interpretations put upon them, as well by those who adopt them as by those who
object to them, are of the most uncertain and conflicting kinds. We therefore think
that they should be restrained only when they give offence to the parishioners ; and, so
far as the recommendation proposed in the Report is intended to secure this object, we
concur in it, and we believe the remedy suggested to be effectual and sufficient. Any
further remarks on the mode of securing such other uniformity as may be deemed
desirable appear to us best reserved for our next Report

JOHN DUKE COLERIDGE.
ARTHUR P. STANLEY.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
[DISSENT OF EARL BEAUCHAMP]

Being unable to concur in the above Report, I beg leave humbly to lay before Your
Majesty the reasons for my dissent therefrom.

In the terms of Your Royal Commission, Your Majesty was graciously pleased to direct
us to make full and impartial inquiry, so as to secure general uniformity of practice in
such matters as may be deemed essential.

These words appear to imply, as is indeed obviously the case, that it is not necessary,
even if desirable, that absolute uniformity should prevail.

It must be remembered that all ceremonies, whether performed in an ornate or
slovenly manner, must be the expression of doctrine ; and that in the Church of England,
as in other religious bodies, the two aspects of sacramental belief, briefly described as
the objective and subjective, have always existed. Each of these aspects may be true,
but, if exhibited so as to exclude the consideration of the other, the just proportions of
the truth are obscured. It follows then that neither side should be excluded from
view, but that the balance should be evenly held. An illustration is found in the two
varying methods of delivery of the Holy Sacrament to communicants, adopted in the
Prayer Books of 1549 and 1552 respectively.

By the wisdom of the rulers of the Church in the early days of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth these two forms were combined into one harmonious whole; and while an
ornate ceremonial, corresponding to high doctrinal views of the Holy Communion, pre-
vailed in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, and in the Chapels of certain Colleges, and
of some Royal and Episcopal Houses, it is true that in most parish churches the standard
of ritual conformed to the Prayer Book of 1552, rather than to those forms which, though
neglected in practice by the people, were prescribed by the wisdom of Queen Elizabeth
and her counsellors.

Disregard of ceremonial in our services continued almost down to the present day ; and
the alienation of the population, especially among the lower orders, from regular
attendance at religious worship, may be fairly attributed to the want of life and heartiness
which well ordered services promote.

The Arches Court of the Archbishop of Canterbury has recently declared the ceremonial
use of Incense unlawful. It will not be necessary, therefore, to express an opinion upon a
practice which, though largely enjoined under the dispensation of the Old Testament,
and forming no insignificant feature of the worship of Heaven as set forth in the
Revelation of St. John the Divine, has been disused among us for many years.

The use of Lights as accessory to the Holy Communion has been declared lawful by
the same high authority; and if the innocent and edifying reason alleged for this
usage by the Royal Injunctions of King Edward VI. be borne in mind, together with
the fact that the Church as well of the East as of the West, and some Protestant bodies,
have invariably followed this custom, the danger of superstition appears so remote, that
I cannot recommend restraint in a matter upon which an authoritative judgment has
been now pronounced.

A time when wide latitude in matters of high doctrine is tolerated if not encouraged
within the Church does not appear suitable for curtailing a ceremonial observance to
which no superstitious meaning is attached. The only accusation brought against
Lights is that their use prevails in the Church of Rome; but if the custom be in itself
harmless, that circumstance affords no more reason for proscribing it than the three
Creeds, or the Surplice.

In this matter I cannot persuade myself to bring into the category of things
in which uniformity must be deemed essential a practice which has so largely prevailed
in Christian communities, and which is judicially declared to be not only innocent in
itself, but also not contrary to law.

If then in this respect uniformity is found to be not essential, I humbly conceive
that by the terms of Your Majesty's gracious Commission I am precluded from
recommending legislation tending to prohibition.

It may be added that many customs now generally accepted have occasioned far
greater disturbance than has attended the practices to which exception is now taken ;
and it has been found that a declaration of the law has greatly tended to allay the
dissatisfaction which was felt when the state of the law and the reason of the customs
had not been fully considered.

The machinery proposed in the Report to give effect to the grief of parishioners
in the cases of Vestments and Lights appears calculated to promote disturbance rather
than peace, and to be incapable of adaptation to the varying circumstances of parishes
and congregations of a widely different character.

The Commissioners unanimously recommended in their First Report that, to secure
the peace of congregations, and to prevent breaches of Christian charity, parishioners
aggrieved by the use of unusual vesture on the part of the ministering clergy should
have an easy and effectual process of complaint and redress. But assenting to the
reasonable proposition of the First Report, that the use of Vestments that have been
long disused should be restrained (by which term I do not understand prohibition)
where distasteful to parishioners, whether the actual legality of the practice be esta-
blished or not, I am not prepared to recommend so serious a curtailment of liberty of
many devout congregations as would follow if the recommendations of my brother
Commissioners were adopted in their integrity.

BEAUCHAMP.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
[DISSENT OF THE REV. THOMAS WALTER PERRY]

It is with much regret that I find myself unable to concur in this Second Report,
agreed to by the majority of the Commissioners, and therefore I humbly beg leave to lay
before Your Majesty my reasons for not signing the same.

The 4th, 5th, and 6th Clauses (though containing a correct summary of the conclu-
sions arrived at by most of the Commissioners as to the absence of "sufficient evidence"
to prove the use, during the last 300 years, of Lighted Candles on the Lord's Table "as
"Accessories to the Holy Communion," and also with regard to "the use of Incense in
"the Public Services of the Church") do not afford a complete view of the subject. It
is important, therefore, to observe that insufficient evidence of usage is no adequate
proof of non-usage; and, further, that in this case the sources of information known to
the Commissioners are too few to warrant any positive statement as to the extent of use
or disuse in the long period of three centuries; nor is it probable, from the nature of the
case, that any more explicit records should have been kept than those already produced.
Moreover it would be quite as difficult to prove usage in respect of other Ornaments and
Practices which the Judicial Committee of Your Majesty's Privy Council in 1857
decided to be lawful, viz., Altar or other Crosses employed as internal decorations of
Churches, the use of various coloured Altar Cloths in the same Church, a moveable
Ledge on the Lord's Table, and the bringing of the Bread and Wine from a Credence
Table to the Altar at the time of the Offertory.

The 7th Clause proposes to apply to "Lighted Candles" and "Incense" the same
"principles" of restraint "which guided us in our First Report" as to Vestments. But the
case of Lighted Candles during the Celebration of the Eucharist is not parallel with the
other two practices. The Lawfulness of this use of Lighted Candles has just been
decided in the Arches Court of Canterbury, (though, indeed, an Appeal has since been
lodged with the Privy Council,) and this Second Report states that "The use of
"Lighted Candles at the Celebration of the Holy Communion has been introduced into
"certain Churches within a period of about the last twenty-five years;" whereas one
ground for complaint of the Vestments is their very recent introduction: while it is also
alleged that they are of doubtful Legality, because they were not specifically in question
when the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council declared, in 1857, "that the same
"Dresses and the same Utensils, or Articles, which were used under the First Prayer
"Book of Edward the Sixth, may still be used." This latter objection appears to be of
small importance, for it was necessary that their Lordships should (as they did) interpret
the Rubric on the "Ornaments of the Church, and of the Ministers thereof," in order to
adjudicate upon those Ornaments which were actually under their consideration. Incense,
at present, stands in a different position from both the Vestments and the Lighted Candles ;
for the Arches Court has decided it to be unlawful "to bring in Incense at the beginning
"or during the Celebration, and remove it at the close of the Celebration of the
"Eucharist." It is requisite also to consider that the Vestments, the Lighted Candles,
and the Incense are not by any means equally disliked, though it is no doubt true that
by very many persons the whole three are alike the subject of complaint.

The 8th Clause provides the mode of restraint, and is objectionable on the following
grounds :—

1. Because it makes the practice of a period of very general indifference and even of
opposition to the plainest and most positive Laws of the Church of England and Ireland
"the rule of the Church" for the future, "whensoever it shall be found necessary that
"order be taken concerning" the use of "Vestments, Lights, and Incense ;" whereas no
such expedient was resorted to when the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, only
eleven years ago, declared the Lawfulness of Ornaments, which, to say the least, had been
quite as much opposed as these, and, among other reasons, on the same ground of long
continued and general disuse.

2. Because it leaves no discretion whatever to the Bishop, if Parishioners complain to
him of "a variation from established usage, by the introduction of Vestments, Lights,
"or Incense in the Public Services of the Church ;" but compels him, without any regard
to the circumstances of the case, to "take order forthwith for the discontinuance of such
"variation ;" thus introducing a novel and most arbitrary rule, entirely contradictory of
the two important principles, upon which the Order in the Book of Common Prayer, for
appeasing diversity and resolving doubts "concerning the Service of the Church," is
founded, viz., First, the inherent discretion of the Episcopate ; and, Secondly, the recog-
nized subjection of that discretion to every Law which binds alike the Bishop and his
Clergy, in many cases the Laity also.

3. Because it might, and probably would, deprive entire Congregations of their liberty,
or rather right, to have their Services conducted according to the Laws of the Church
of England ; notwithstanding that the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council said, in
1857, "Although their Lordships are not disposed in any case to restrict within nar-
"rower limits than the Law has imposed the discretion which, within those limits, is
"justly allowed to Congregations, by the rules, both of the Ecclesiastical and the
"Common Law Courts, the directions of the Rubric must be complied with ;" [OCR
defective] Cases already exist, and will probably increase, of a Parish containing several Consecrated
or Licensed Churches or Chapels, the Ministers of which have no Legally assigned
Cure of Souls; these places of Divine Worship are more or less available for all the
Inhabitants ; and the Services, varying as they do in their simplicity or ornateness, are
adapted to different classes of Parishioners, while not disturbing general Parochial Unity.
But this Clause, construed as it must be with the next following, would put it in the
power of any three or five resident Householder Parishioners, who shall "declare them-
"selves to be Members of the United Church," to prevent the use of Vestments,
Lights, and Incense (however lawful) in any such Church or Chapel in their Parish ; and
this, too, wholly irrespective of the fact of their own habitual attendance at, and prefer-
ence for, the Services of the Mother Church of the Parish, or of some other Church or
Chapel in their own or even in another Parish.

4. Because (while it would rightly protect a minority or a majority of Parishioners from
having Vestments, Lights, or Incense introduced, contrary to their wishes, into those
Services in their own Churches or Chapels which they wish to or do frequent) it affords
no security whatever to any minority or majority who (being loyal and earnest in their
desire to have those Services of the Church which they are accustomed to attend
conducted in conformity with the Rules of the Prayer Book,) would, for the sake of
others, so far forego their own wishes as to be content with the use of such Ornaments in
Services held at times and in places which could not interfere with those Services which
others have been accustomed or desire to attend.

The object of the 9th Clause is to prevent "frivolous applications being brought before
"the Bishop ;" but it seems inadequate for its purpose, on two grounds :

1. Because it does not require that the Church or Chapel Warden or Wardens should
act only at the authorized instigation of Parishioners: this is an important consideration,
in [proposing?] to clothe them with a new power of Official complaint, in addition to their
present authority to make Presentments.

2. Because as this Report deals chiefly, though not entirely, with Ornaments which are
accessory to the Celebration of the Holy Communion, so it appears to me to be of primary
importance that the recognized complainants against such accessories should not merely
"declare themselves to be Members of the Church of England," but should also be
known to be bona fide Members and Communicants of the said Church.

The 10th Clause purports to be explanatory of the three previous Clauses, and declares
that their object "is simply to provide . . . . . a special facility for restraining such
"variations" as they refer to, "without interfering in other respects with the general Law
"of the Church as to Ornaments, or the ordinary remedies now in force." This, how-
ever, is a proposal much to be deprecated for the following reason :—

Because, on the one hand, it involves the hitherto unapplied and objectionable principle
of exceptional and repressive Legislation in reference to the observance of particular
points in the Church's Law of Ornaments, which Law nevertheless it is not proposed to
repeal ; while, on the other hand, it leaves all non-observance of the same Law to the unaided
power of existing remedies.

The 11th Clause, while professing great toleration, is likely, if acted upon, to prove
seriously detrimental to the best interests of the Church, by being a bar to all real
improvement in the conduct of her Services. Hitherto "the rightful liberties" which
are here recognized as having been "heretofore enjoyed by the Clergy and Laity of the
"Church of England," have at various times, and especially during the last thirty years,
broken through stereotyped forms of neglect and disobedience, which custom, or ignorance,
or prejudice had maintained ; and thus most material changes have been effected which
are now commonly allowed to be generally beneficial, though at the time when they were
first attempted, and even long after, they encountered precisely the same objections
which this Clause sustains ; sometimes, too, in the form of such unreasoning and violent,
not to say lawless, opposition as it may be hoped will not again be manifested.

But this Clause, though reasonably advocating the inclusion in the "National Church"
of "men of varying shades of opinion," (a subject, however, which seems scarcely within
the terms of Your Majesty's Commission,) inconsistently opposes those varieties of
Ceremonial which are the natural accompaniments of opinions thus allowed to have a
free development. The condition of "this large comprehension" of "opinion" is stated
to be, "a conscientious acceptance of" the "recognized formularies and appointed rites"
of the Church of England. The advocates of a revived Ceremonial themselves claim to
act upon this very principle in ordering the Public Services. Therefore the conclusion
would appear to be, either that, as Your Majesty's Commission indicates, "general unifor-
"mity of practice" must be limited to "such matters as may be deemed essential," or
it must be extended to the fullest details of all that is required by the Ecclesiastical
Laws. It is obvious that so rigid a compliance is neither possible nor desirable in the
existing condition of the Church of England; nor indeed has it ever been maintained
since the passing of the First Statute of Uniformity in 1549. To "secure," as our
Commission suggests, "essential" Uniformity, it does not appear to me necessary to
insist upon that strictness of practice, as opposed to liberty of opinion, which this Clause
of the Report seems to urge. Unquestionably it is "most desirable that in the celebration
"of the Church's Rites there shall be introduced no novel practices, which are welcome
"only to some, but offensive to others;" yet, while it may be hoped that charity
alone will generally prevent changes calculated to lead to such a result, it cannot be
concealed that quite as great, perhaps greater, scandal is caused by disregard of positive
rules in conducting the Services of the Church; and still more, it must be feared,
by notoriously contradictory teaching, which is complained of as being irreconcileable
with her "recognized formularies."

For these reasons, and because I fear that the proposals now made, so far from promoting
peace, tend towards provoking a strife which may seriously risk a disruption in the
Church of England, I humbly think I shall best discharge my duty to Your Majesty
by withholding my signature from this Second Report.

THOMAS WALTER PERRY.

W. F. KEMP, Secretary,
Jerusalem Chamber, Westminster,
30th April 1868.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
[Opening of MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS — captured only to document the meeting
format and attendance; the remainder is not transcribed here.]

MINUTES OF PROCEEDINGS.

TWENTIETH MEETING.

Jerusalem Chamber, Westminster, Thursday, November 21st, 1867.

PRESENT:

Archbishop of Canterbury.  Sir Robert Joseph Phillimore.
Earl Stanhope.             Sir Travers Twiss.
Earl of Harrowby.          Mr. John Abel Smith.
Earl Beauchamp.            Mr. Beresford Hope.
Bishop of London.          Mr. J. G. Hubbard.
Bishop of St. David's.     Dean of Ely.
Bishop of Oxford.          Dean of Lincoln.
Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol.  Dr. Payne Smith.
Lord Portman.              Rev. H. Venn.
Lord Ebury.                Rev. W. G. Humphry.
Mr. Cardwell.              Rev. Robert Gregory.
Sir Joseph Napier.         Rev. T. W. Perry.

The Commissioners arranged the order of their proceedings.

[END OF CAPTURE]
